OCTOBER 17th, 2023. Regular
meeting of the municipal
transportation agency board of
directors and parking authority
commission. Good afternoon
directors. Staff and members of
the public. We thank you for
joining us. This meeting is
being held in hybrid format,
occurring in person at city hall
room 400 broadcast live on sf tv
and by phone. The phone number
to use is (415)!A655-0001. Access
code 26628586819. When the item
is called dial star three to
enter the queue, commenters will
have up to two minutes to
provide comment unless otherwise
noted by the chair. Please speak
clearly and sure you're in a
quiet location and turn off any
tvs or computers around you.
Please note that a time limit of
ten minutes of remote public
comment on each action or
discussion item has been set in
notice for this meeting. We
thank you for your cooperation.
Places you on item number two.
Roll call director hemminger
here hemminger present director
henderson in henderson. Present
director hinsey. Present hinsey
present. Director. So here. So
present. Director uchitelle here
you present director. Kahina
here. Kahina present chair.
Chehregan here. Eken present.
For the record, I note that
director hinsey is attending the
meeting remotely. Director
hinsey is reminded that she must
appear on camera throughout the
meeting, and in order to speak
or vote on any items places you
on. Item number three, the
ringing and use of cell phones
and similar sound producing
electronic devices are
prohibited at this meeting. The
chair MAY order the removal from
the meeting room of any person
responsible for the ringing or
use of a cell phone or other
similar sound producing
electronic device. This places
you on item four approval of
minutes for the OCTOBER 3rd
regular meeting. Thank you
directors with any changes to
the OCTOBER 3rd meeting minutes
hearing none open public comment
for those in the room on item
4th OCTOBER third meeting
minutes and seeing none, please
go to remote at this time we'll
move to remote public comment
not to exceed a time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. No speakers. Okay.
Close public comment. Is there a
motion motion to approve the
minutes? Second. Second please
call the roll on the motion to
approve the minutes. Director
hemminger a hemminger. Director
henderson. Henderson and
director. Hinsey hi director. So
I. So director uchitel uchitel I
director kahina. I. I kahina
chehregan. I ekin. I thank you.
The minutes are approved. Places
you are on item number five
communications. I have none.
Moving on to item number six
introduction of new or
unfinished business by board
members. Okay colleagues, are
there items of new and
unfinished business? I see you,
director uchitel. I'd like to
open with one new and unfinished
item, which is I had asked
previously our new directors
director so and director
henderson to share a few
reflections on their priorities
coming into the meeting, into
the board and I know you had a
chance to share priorities with
the staff at a town hall, and I
wondered if we could just turn
the mic to you all to share a
couple reflections on your
priorities for your service.
Thank you. Chair. Good
afternoon, everyone. Good
afternoon. Welcome back. Many
and I my priorities are pretty
consistent. I think everyone had
already hear it many, many
times. And but I am really
appreciative of putting it on
this form. Um, because it's
become an agenda item and then
we are going to set some of
these items interactions in our
next year. So my first foremost
priority is public safety, but
that's a really broad item. So I
wanted to distill down to a few
things that I think it could be
in immediately actionable. So,
so it's a safe ridership on
public transportation is what I
really want to focus. And
precisely it touches along
vision zero. That is something
that we all really wanted to get
better at and we are working to
get better at this and I wanted
to see that we have this thing.
Imagine every parents feel
confident and safe to let their
own children to ride muni to
schools and after school
programs just as simple as that.
I understand that this is not
something that in our own agency
we can single handedly to
achieve that because there is so
much it takes to how to get
these kids to be on the street
and get to the stop and safely
wait for our muni and then get
on and get off. So I would like
to continue to work and foster
more, relate with our police
department and some other
community. His group to help us
to achieve this priorities that
I want to have because that's a
very important thing. Everyone
has kids and everyone's friends
has kids. Not everyone, but we
all understand. We all are kids
once. So that is my priority
number one. And my second
priority is reaching out to more
culturally appropriate community
outreach, focusing on people
look like me and people look
like like they are a minority in
this city. So racial equity and
belonging is something that I
hold really dear to and I carry
it on from my previous
experience in the arts
commission and then in the
planning department in this
commission called historic
preservation commission. And so
I would love to continue you to
see we I think our agency had a
really robust program. So I
would love to continue to
elevate us to continue to adapt
and be very, very culturally,
appropriately reaching out to
our different communities and
especially in our community
stations. So the third one is my
priority is focusing on how can
we find more money, more funding
and I because this is this is
really important, you know, at
the end of the day, we need that
gas. We need that juice to run.
And precisely I see this as not
just a local issue, as a
regional issue. So we have to
really think really outside of
the box. And I would love to
have a lot of creative thinking
of people here and also whoever
else is listening to. I'm like
really tapping into my friend us
who have done amazing things
themselves and just to see what
can we do locally and also
regional in the state level and
federal level, because I think
that this will really help us
and to solve one piece of the
puzzle or to better position our
agency to be competitively to
hire staff with a purposeful
skill sets that are ready to
face our current and future
challenges. That's it. That's
all I have to say. Thank you so
much, director. So it's really
helpful to hear your priorities.
Director henderson good
afternoon, everyone, and thank
you, chair, for allowing me the
opportunity to share with you
all a little bit about the
priorities that I see. I pretty
much am in alignment with with
what director soul offered. I
think that safety is really
important. Safety on our
systems, but also safe
neighborhoods. I am a hauser by
profession and so part of my
every day job is to make sure
that I'm creating communities
that people want to live in,
feel safe in. And part of that,
I think, is our ability through
this agency to really connect
neighborhoods, make certain
parts of san francisco so that
oftentimes are under the radar
or or a little bit on the edges
of the map. Make them
accessible. You know, the hills
don't make the city super easy
to traverse. So I think that we
really do have an opportunity to
ensure that folks, whether they
live in the center of the city
or on the periphery, are able to
access shops, health care, to
have stable housing and stable
neighborhoods and really are
able to enjoy their neighborhood
and parts of the city that they
MAY not necessarily be visit
often, but it doesn't take
forever to get there. And I hope
that I hope that we are able to
focus while I'm here on on
really creating neighbor hoods
that families, that individuals
that people can enjoy and feel
safe in, safe walking down the
streets, wide sidewalks. I think
it's so, so important to create
a sense of place and so I look
forward to learning more, but
also contributing to creating
that throughout the city and
especially in areas where where
they historically have have not
had those types of amenities. I
also really prioritize equity
and want to make sure that those
neighborhoods that I've
mentioned across the city are
adequate represented, have that
seat at the table, have the
voice at and are open for
business. Just like just like
other areas. I really want to
make sure that the mta can
continue to make the city excel
and surpass all of the
expectations that we have to be
the great place to live that
I've grown up in and that that I
hope to, you know, be in forever
really. And then finally and I
think that, you know, it's funny
that find the money but also
ensuring that we are caretakers
of this resource that we ensure
that the fiscal and financial
viability of this agency is top
tier and top notch, that we're
able to have a successful the
next 100, 150 years of our
transit systems building and
building neighborhoods and
commuter city. I think it's one
thing to create place, but
really to create that sense of
community. And I think ensuring
that the financial stability of
this agency long term will make
sure that we can create that
community, that that that is so
important. And so I look forward
to all the work that we'll do
here together. And I'd that's it
. Thank you so much. Yes. Really
really grateful to both of you
for sharing some some thoughts
and just as a reminder for
everyone, this was a question I
asked all the members of the
board at our FEBRUARY workshop
at the beginning of this year,
and we're closer now to the
JANUARY workshop next year than
we are to that one. So we'll
have another opportunity to
revisit priorities. But it's
helpful for me as chair to know
your priorities and I also think
for staff and ensuring that we
make sufficient air time at
these meetings and staff
resources are allocated to those
priorities. So really appreciate
that other members of the board,
director yakusho. Thank you so
much. Chair eken and I'm so
excited to see both of my new
colleagues get all that shit
done. And I believe that you
can. I also see the fire
marshals in the room, so I just
want to acknowledge him. Thank
you for being here. Fire marshal
coughlin and. I. I have some new
business a lot of you MAY have
heard. Maybe you didn't hear
that I spent the last week and a
half in israel, pretty much in
and out of bomb shelters and
decided to throw myself into the
volunteer effort that had been
going on there to collect
donated items and deliver it to
families who are suffering and
being there was deeply inspired
bring. I saw thousands of people
come together, old and young
people from all walks of life.
And I actually was able to see
in front of me what it looks
like when a whole community can
come together to get things
done, to put their differences
aside and work as a unit. And it
reminded me of why I am in this
work. It reminded me of why I
consider myself an organizer and
an activist and why I came to
san francisco. It inspired me
and frankly, when I came back a
few days ago, it made me really
reconsider everything about
about what I'm doing and how I
spend my time and what motivates
me and what lights me on fire.
And so because of that, I
decided that this is going to be
my last meeting as an sfmta
director and that I'm going to
be leaving the board. I have so
much respect for this agency and
I know it's tough because we
just got our full board. I have
respect for the agency. I have
respect for you all, and I have
even more respect for the
thousands and thousands of
workers who allow us to do what
we do. So I'm really, really
proud of what we've been able to
accomplish on this board.
Navigating our aging agency
through a once in a century dark
time and a pandemic, and being
in the trenches with all of you
on fucking microsoft teams
building the jfk promenade and
building dozens of miles of
transit only lanes, creating a
new slow streets network,
pushing this agency to create a
connected network of bike lanes,
helping institute a first in the
nation. Text before tow program
re negotiating our contract with
clear channel to clean our bus
shelters and get them looking
like we want them to look like
and helping. Working alongside
jeff, tom and julie to get our
internal house in order. I'm so
proud of where this agency is
now and all that we've been able
to accomplish together over the
last three years that I've been
on this board. I have absolute
confidence in the sf mta I have
confidence in all of you and I'm
so excited to cheer you guys on
from the sidelines working with
directors ly and board and
brinkman eken kahena hemminger.
So henderson and hinsey has been
one of the great honors of my
life. This is a varsity team and
I'm so proud of what we've been
able to do together. So thank
you for making me feel so
welcome. Thank you for giving me
this opportunity and for
believing in me. I've only just
gotten started. And that is my
new business is. Who I know. Is
there a motion to approve or
disapprove? I make a motion to
reject the premise of director
leaving colleagues. I know this
is probably shocking news, so I
want to make some space. Not
necessarily today, but at a
future meeting. For some remarks
and reflections and gratitude
for director yekutiel. Once you
can gather your thoughts,
obviously, if anyone would like
to add anything now, please feel
free. But he has committed to me
to come to at least one more
meeting to be recognized for his
service so we could do that. The
next meeting perhaps. Okay are
there any other items of new or
unfinished. Director? So. I'll
take this moment to say a few
words because this is my new
favorite neighbor for a few
times in the past few months.
And you or two. But is like to
soon you are a legend. I always
I met many many years ago in a
lot of community benefiting
event and he's always so
enthusiastic about everything
that is for the community and I
live in the mission so many cafe
is always the corner where I
will hang out with my
girlfriends, you know, and
seeing the place had looking
really spiffy. And jesse now for
me, it was before and I'm going
to MISS You a lot. I will take
some moment to process what I
also need to say more glorified
version of what I feel about
you. But I just feel a little
missing you, you know, like
you're just going to be an empty
seat, you know? And but I think
that the work that you do throw
yourself out there in this past
ten days where everyone was
fleeting and trying to find a
place to leave, you actually
jump into the fire to help
really, really, really. Really
hit really hit me. You know,
it's like that selfless of
courage to go out and do your
part. And that's I had you have
my highest respect for you for
to do that I'm just really
grateful that you come home and
safely and also use your ability
to continue to do what you feel
is the best use of your talent
and your influence and
advocating for the cause that
you care for your. Yes. And this
is really heavy and it trumped
over what I actually wanted to
also share. And that is
something that I thought that's
also really important and it's a
different topic, but many I just
really, really appreciate you
and we're going to continue to
be working on a lot of other
issues in other capacities,
right? So I'm going to share
another thing I wanted to share
for last week. I attended well,
this month is the filipino
american filipino heritage
month. So last week I got some
time to actually I got invited
to our cable car museum and
actually did that celebration
with our filipino american asian
friends and colleagues and staff
and even our fellow I believe
he's in entertainment commission
. Al perez was there. He also is
the vice chair of the a asian
heritage aapi, asian pacific
islander heritage month
organizer. So and our favorite
secretary, christine, was there,
too. And it was a really great
moment where our equity, racial
equity and belonging group find
their time and actually some of
the manager went across town to
their favorite filipino stores
to buy the best lumpia to share
with everyone. And it was a very
warm getting together moment in
also in a very unsettled time of
our current world. And I think
it's always good to take a
moment and really reach out to
our neighbors and friends and
people that you you know or you
don't know and you just get get
together and celebrate each
other's press alliance. And this
is very important. I actually
was saying that we every year
we're going to go bigger. Right,
christine? Every year we're
going to go bigger and do more
celebration because I am aware
of that. We have a lot of
filipino american in our agency,
see, and I love all of them.
They all have their talent and
they spend overnight to decked
out the cable car with the
history of all the significant
filipino americans that had
contributed not only to san
francisco, but the history of
transportation in our city. So
that was very important. And I
want to share it to everyone.
And please ride the cable car
with me next year. Okay. If
there's nothing further from my
colleagues, I will open this
item for public comment for
anyone attending the meeting in
person.
Board members. Luke bornheimer.
I missed manny's share director
eukaryal share. So I don't know
exactly what was said, but I
gather that director director is
stepping down or stepping away
from the board. I'm saddened to
hear that and I really
appreciate the service that
you've given our city, what
you've done here, what you've
done for our city. Beyond this
board. And yeah, I'm sad to hear
that, but hopeful for your
future and whatever that brings.
Thank you. Next speaker, please.
Hi, stacy randecker. I first
just wanted to say I was so
thrilled to hear your
priorities. Director so and
director henderson kids, kids,
kids, kids, kids, kids. The only
thing I would say is can we also
get them to bike to school, to
the bus? Is top notch. Yes. We
want muni. My kids are muni
kids, but I wish they could have
been bike kids to you and making
places. Oh my GOD. Are we could
have so many places if we just
prioritized people instead of
motor vehicle throughput in our
city. And we really need to look
for those spaces where we can
bring people together, you know,
and our merchant corridors, we
have so many spots and on the
east side of the city is doesn't
have enough. I live in potrero
and it's like I have to go on
vacation to the west side to get
all the good stuff. And I'd
really like it in in our side of
town to do and director curio I
reject that. I mean I want what
is best for you. You've been I
know people weren't really they
were skeptical about you joining
the board. But I hope all of
those naysayers have been won
over. I really appreciate so
much what you've done and I
guess maybe now you'll join
valencia for people. I don't
know. But all the best to you.
We'll MISS You. Thank you. Not
seeing anyone else in the room.
Rise to speak, please open
remote comment at this time.
We'll move to remote public
comment not to exceed a total
time of ten minutes. Members of
the public wishing to comment
should dial star three to enter
the queue. Each speaker will
have two minutes. Moderator for
speaker. Great. Can you hear me
now? Yes, go ahead. Excellent.
David pilpel good afternoon. I
caught the end of director
jacobi's comments. I appreciate
his thoughts and it's great that
he's back safely and I'm sure
that he won't be too far away or
for very long. As with many, we
have not always agreed, which is
fine, but I think that we
respect each other deeply, and
I'm sure that we will
communicate at some point soon.
and I wish him the best and I
think the board will be worse
with his departure. Anyway,
thanks for listening on this
item. Thank you. No additional
speakers. Okay close close
public comment and please call
the next item place is you on
item number seven, the
director's report. Thank you.
Directors and thank you
directors. So and henderson for
clarifying your priorities. A
year nearly a year ago, back in
FEBRUARY, we had a board budget
workshop that we're preparing
for again and one of the most
important aspects of that
workshop is hearing from board
members about your priorities,
and particularly clarity about
your values. That is how we make
the hard decisions about
allocating our increasingly
limited financial and staffing
resources. So the clearer you
all can be, the easier it is for
our team to make the hard
choices that we have to make
every day. And thank you, of
course, to director curiel for
your long service and
partnership on this board. As we
think about much of our work, a
lot of our work is trying to
align, not only with your
values, but also the mayor's
priorities, which include
delivering on our housing
responsibilities, safety and
security on our streets, and
also small business success and
economic recovery. And one of
the things, manny, that I really
appreciate about you is you
understand the nature of san
francisco's boom bust economy
that the san francisco of 2018
will never come back again. But
what we excel at in san
francisco is figuring out what
is next and our small business
leaders like lead the world at
figuring out what is next of
upholding san francisco values
and hopefulness and ingenuity at
all levels and scales and
bringing people together to
figure out what kind of a city
do we want to be. So even though
you'll no longer be playing that
role for us on the board, I know
that you will be continuing to
play that role as a small
business owner and as one of the
most important conveners in san
francisco in these challenging
times. Now I'd like to go to my
director's report. Speaking of
small businesses, we have
recently launched our tiny
little marketing team led by
gene brophy here at the sfmta,
launched a go local small
business campaign in partnership
ship with neighborhood
associations and business
associations across san
francisco and really being led
from our own sfmta small
business working group. So jean
and her team partnered with
local artist dan bransfield to
do a set of psa campaigns
highlighting our city's
amazingly vibrant and diverse
and creative small business
district, all of which are there
because of muni and muni is
there because of them. As you
know, san francisco has this
unique geographic quality where
we have long, skinny
neighborhood commercial
districts that follow the
historic streetcar lines that
muni was born from. And so small
business recovery and muni's
recovery go hand in hand. And as
we'll talk about later, our our
local business communities are
now our main drivers of muni's
ridership growth. So we're very
happy to be promoting this this
campaign. Next up, speaking of
small businesses, we're also
happy to announce that governor
newsom announced last week that
we and our partners at the
department of public works would
receive a clean california grant
to the tune of $3.3 million.
This is focused on allowing us
to take our existing efforts at
cleaning and upgrading all of
our facilities and supercharge
them so we're quite happy about
that. We'll be focused on
cleaning of shelters and
stations, removing graffiti,
improving lighting, doing much
of the work that the team has
been busy doing recently on the
t third line, where we've been
upgrading, for example, all
every single one of the lighting
fixtures, which are from 19
whatever technology in order to
be more easily maintained, more
energy efficient, more less
vulnerable to vandalism and
brighter for our riders. So
we're going to be able to
continue doing more of this
effort focused on downtown and
south of market chinatown and
the muni metro system. And
thanks to existing contracts
that we have in place, we'll be
able to begin doing this work
starting at the end of this
month. The big news for this
director's report, of course, is
our legislative update. Late
last saturday, OCTOBER 14th, was
the deadline for governor newsom
to either sign or veto bills.
And there was a big long list of
bills that we have been
tracking. Indeed, a long list of
bills, some of which we have had
as our number one legislative
priority for over a decade. And
I am very pleased to announce
that the governor signed laura
friedman's bill, ab 645, our top
legislator priority, which
authorizes finally speed safety
cameras on a limited basis in
california. California now joins
us. Most of the rest of the
world and at least 18 us states,
including states like
mississippi and virginia and
tennessee, in legalizing ing
this basic life saving
technology that can cut traffic
fatalities by as much as half.
We were fortunate to have
attended a celebration event
hosted by walk sf last night
that included a based basically
the entire spectrum of policy
makers here in san francisco,
members of our board, many
members of our staff, families
for safe streets and advocates
from all over san francisco, all
of whom came together under a
quite big tent in order to
continually expand the coalition
of people who could support this
this measure by listening to
them carefully and by
incremental adjustments to the
legislation to the point where
it finally got signed. So thank
you to all of you, and
particularly jerry ekin, for
your support. There's a couple
of other bills that also got
signed. Ab 361 now allows local
agencies like us to install
forward facing cameras on city
owned vehicles to enforce double
parking in the bike lanes,
something that we have long
wanted to be able to expedite.
This technology will
dramatically increase the
efficiency of our parking
control officers and allow us to
make a bigger effort there. The
governor also signed ab 434,
which seeks to reduce harassment
of women and other vulnerable
groups on public transit by
collecting better data related
to these incidents. This builds
basically it's modeled after the
work that we have already been
doing here at the sfmta, but it
requires us, other agencies like
ours to do similar work, that
together we will be able to do
better by having consistent data
across the state and therefore
the goal being to attract
additional resources since the
safety of women and girls and
children are high priorities for
this agency. Ab 413 was also
signed into law. Again taking
work that we'd already been
doing around daylighting here at
the sfmta and making that state
law. It prohibits drivers from
parking or stopping within 20ft
of a crosswalk with a bunch of
very specific exceptions. Other
news we are collaborating with
the police department, the
district attorney's office and
other agencies, ces, in order to
support their efforts around
reducing vehicle break ins. We
have found ways to take
advantage of our new parking
meter technology to include
messages on our parking meter
screens, directing people to not
leave their valuables in the
car. Those messages will be
available in english and spanish
and in chinese within a couple
of weeks. We're also adding
messages to the pay by phone app
screen. And then finally, I
wanted to report on our ongoing
efforts to address state of good
repair and our deferred
maintenance backlog throughout
the system. One of the things
that I have directed staff to do
throughout the agency is to be
very clear about the condition.
One of our most important
infrastructure. And so they have
been dutifully investigating the
reality of all of the vulnerable
cities that we face throughout
the system. And so the team, um,
completed the most extensive
inspection of our over 100 and
over 100 year old twin peaks
tunnel, the most detailed
inspection that we had done in
almost 50 years, including not
only looking at all of the
structure, but actually getting
behind the structure into the
plenum space between the tunnel
structure and the raw rock. And
in some cases old growth redwood
beams that exist between the
tunnel structure and the rock.
This is an old tunnel. They were
also able to obtain all of the
records of all of the previous
repairs have been done over the
last 100 years and we're
actually so grateful to our
predecessors for keeping such
extreme, ordinarily good records
on the state of the
infrastructure. It reminds us of
the responsibilities that we
have to our successors. The team
completed very, very
microscopically detailed lidar
surveys and created a full 3d
model of the tunnel. They found.
Let me cut to the chase about
the findings. So there are no
immediate safety issues, which
is a huge relief to me. But the
tunnel is really old and it is
starting to distort. This was
something that was noticed 50
years ago and that distortion
has continued a little bit. It
will require some adjustments.
And so what we're having the
time now to do in a
non-emergency way is actually
figure out exactly what
adjustments are needed, what
strengthening. We're also,
because of the lidar testing,
can keep very, very close track
so that we know if the urgency
level increases and therefore we
need to speed up repairs or if
it's been 50 years, it can go
another 50 years without us
needing to do much. So we are
now working on the next phase of
the project, which is to
investigate what are the
appropriate corrective actions
and when those might happen, and
then to incorporate that into
our capital planning and that is
the end of my report. Thank you.
Director tumlin directors, do
you have questions or comments
on the director's report?
Director you could tell I don't
know if you mentioned this in
your report, but maybe you can.
There were some. Well, it has to
do with governor newsom. There
was some money that was
allocated to us to clean the bus
shelters. That's right. Did you
talk about that just now? I did.
That was the clean california.
Was I just spacing out? Okay no,
no, no. That was the clean
california grant. $3.3 million.
Yes I saw that. But how are we
planning on using it? So we are
working together with the
department of public works. So
part of the money will go to
supplies and equipment and so on
for our own staff. A part of it
will go to some existing
contractors that we have that we
already had on contract to help
facilitate it. Catching up with
some deferred cleaning. But like
how how do you think the san
francisco public will know? Will
they notice it? How could they
notice a difference with this
additional money? Well, what we
hope is that folks will start
noticing a difference like we're
folks are starting to notice a
difference on the t third line.
So the upgrade the steady
upgrading just our crews were
out there. They removed all the
rust from the railings that had
been there since the 90s. We
repainted everything. We changed
it all the light fixtures. We
removed all of the graffiti for
the ad panels and maps. We were
able to replace, like the clear
covers that kind of gotten sun
damage over time. So the goal is
a thousand small improvements
rather than 1 or 2 really big
improvements. The goal is to
bring everything up to a state
of cleanliness that that we
would expect in a city like san
francisco. Okay. And then my
second question and forgive me
if you've also already said this
, but when do you think the city
can expect to start to see the
implementation of the speed
safety cameras, the speed safety
cameras? The law doesn't go into
effect until next year, and it
requires us a series of part of
the compromise of getting the
bill passed was the requirements
for a series of equity studies
and community engagement and a
lot of discussion around
placement. So right now, the
team has already gotten started.
I been under the assumption that
the governor was going to sign
the bill. The team had gotten
started and developing a
detailed timeline as well as
getting ready to make asks of
other organized actions for ways
of being able to help us shorten
that timeline. The team is
committed to san francisco being
the first to having cameras in
place. Great. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Director
hemminger, please. Thank you,
MADAM Chair. And maybe I'll
begin where my colleague ended
on the speed cameras and I do
want to congratulate you, jeff,
and your team, for getting the
bill through a fairly, at times
hostile environment in
sacramento and I'm. I was a
skeptic. I think, to begin with,
that we would get there and
we've gotten there. So I do want
to thank you thank our mutual
employee, kate breen, who made
her this her life's work in the
last five years. And I'm glad we
are where we are. One thing that
would be helpful to me to try to
assess this is a pilot project
right? It's time limited. So
we've got to go out there and do
the best we can and then we'll
go back and go through the
mother MAY game again, given the
fact that it is a pilot. What I
wanted to know is, is we're
we're limited to 33 of these
devices is what what would the
number be if we were just
skipping a pilot and just
implementing this as a citywide?
I'd project how many how many
cameras would we be looking at?
100, 234. I mean, what's how big
is this pilot? That's what I'm
asking. I mean, the authorized
pilot is indeed small and one of
the things that we are focused
on is making sure that the pilot
is successful in order to create
the case that we can go back to
the legislature and either
continue it or expand the
program. And that means not only
demonstrating success in
reducing speeding and reducing
traffic violence, but also
addressing many of the fears
that opponents had put forward
around privacy and equity. And
that's those are two key.
Consider asians in the bill
language itself that we are
ready to focus on demonstrating
that we can protect the privacy
of individuals and make sure
that this technology is not
being used to create more harm
for people who had been targeted
in in in in traffic stops in the
past. So it is a pilot, but can
you characteri size it for me at
all? We believe. 10% or 10. I
mean, how big how big is this
relative to what we would need
as a citywide program? This is a
very small pilot, right? So
we're limited to 33 cameras. We
have a lot more intersections in
our high injury network than 33.
So one of the things that we are
hoping to be able to test with
this pilot is efficacy as well
as trust. And if we are
successful, feel like this
should be one of our primary
tools for addressing the worst
cause of traffic violence, which
is excessive speed by people
driving cars. But I mean, you're
just indicating that we've we've
got a fairly long road to hoe.
Correct. To get to that kind of
answer, get it back to
sacramento and then scale it up
right? That's right. And that's
why we appreciate the extreme
patience and inexhaustibility of
people like kate breen, who just
kept coming back again and again
until we got this passed and so
the sooner we can demonstrate
success, the easier it is to go
back to the legislature. Well
and look, I know I've been a bit
of a broken record about this,
but I think it's also the case
that this pilot is not going to
scale soon enough and big enough
to dent the numbers that we keep
seeing every week and month,
which to me means we've got to
keep banging on the police
department to help us enforce
this. The law that's right. The
speed cameras have a lot of
benefit from them for a lot of
reasons, but they're we're five
years away. It sounds like to
me, before we've got something
that we can really make a dent
with. That's right. So this is
we have achieved one major win
in our legislative program. We
have a long list of other
desired legislative changes that
we could also make. And I think
following from the lessons of
particularly the european union,
one which has not faced that the
dramatically escalating rates of
traffic violence that we have in
the united states, but is
instead actually address the
problem they address the problem
through a long list of
legislative changes that we are
eager to see. Also here in the
united states and in california.
Thank you. And just a quick
question on another subject,
which is the twin peaks tunnel.
The I didn't hear you say the
word seismic was was that part
of the assessment that we made
of that tunnel and its
stability? Yes. So we
investigate it. All of the
conditions, both the seismic
condition. There's a lot of
water. There's a whole river in
the tunnel that we need to
understand and manage around.
There is there's the concrete
itself. There's the structure
between the concrete and the
rock wall. There's also the very
old anchors for the overhead
wire. And of course, everything
related to the track bed and the
switches, although that was work
that we had addressed
previously. So the focus was the
structure itself. Okay. Thank
you, MADAM Chair. Thank you.
Director kahina, please. Thank
you. Chair ekin. Question about
ab 4346 is the bill against the
harassment of women? So just
wanted to get more context on
how how the passing of this bill
will expand our efforts to make
transit safer for both operators
and for riders. That's right.
And the focus of the bill is
collecting data. So the best way
for us to be able to help
ourselves allocate our limited
resources, but also so be
transparent to the public about
how we're how what our need is
and how we're addressing that
need is, is by collecting data
and then being transparent about
that data. So some of the work
that our security chief,
kimberly burris, just did this
week is creating a new set of
dashboards around operator and
parking control officer assaults
because that is a core part of
our effort at addressing safety
is both the street users and
transit riders, but also our
employees. And so we have been
working to get way ahead of this
bill to make sure that we've got
solid data around the passenger
experience and our employee
experience. You can find our
muni passenger safety data
online. Already we have
published that broadly. It is at
, I believe it's. At
sfmta.Com/muni data, but you can
certainly search for muni safety
data and we publish our safety
incidents per 100,000 miles by
category and they're in two
different categories. They're in
the top. There's a pull down
menu and you could look at the
historic data tracking a long,
long time back. Plus the new,
more recent data where we
expanded our definition of
assault. So one of the things
that was very clear that was
important to our security chief
is we need to include assault,
not just, you know, exterior
facing violence that's going to
require a trip to the hospital,
but also experiencing harassment
on muni because that it's that
whole array of experiences that
folks face on muni that
determines whether they feel
safe and comfortable and
therefore are willing to ride.
So we expanded our definition in
order to make sure that we are
fully encompassing all of those
factors. So with the passing of
this particular bill, the
signing of this bill, this
effort is now expanded statewide
. That's right. So does that
mean that we can now share data
across agencies and work with
different law enforcement
jurisdictions? Or how does how
does that connection get
created? Yeah, I don't know the
details of how that connection
gets created, but what the bill
sets is standard ised data
collection efforts which we will
be complying with. And then
ideally that helps us create a
stronger case and stronger
coalition at the state level to
get both funding as well as
legislative changes to address
the core problems. And that's
great because we have a few
different transit systems that
operate within san francisco.
And so it's great to see that.
Now we have a statewide effort
to make all transit safer for
riders. Thank you. Thank you.
Director henderson, please.
Thank you, chair. I just had a
question about ab 361. The or
whichever number it is about the
front facing cameras is there or
do you have an idea of what the
financial impact would be to
implement that? I thought that
that existed already. So is
there a capital expenditure that
is going to have to that you
anticipate now that this is
authorized? Yeah. So we have
forward facing cameras on our
muni busses that allow us to
enforce double parking in the
transit lane. This effective
takes that same authorization in
and gives us the ability to put
cameras in our other vehicles to
enforce double parking in the
bike lane. And so we would use
the basically the same
techniques where we have pico
parking control officers who
review video at extreme fast
forward and then stop and then
manually issue a citation. There
is a pretty significant cost to
adding vehicle, adding cameras
to our vehicles. But as we know
from the cameras that are on our
transit vehicles, there's also
significant benefit. Well beyond
being able to enforce illegal
parking. The. 11 or 12 cameras
on our transit vehicles are a
critical component of our
efforts to address both safety
as well as crime. And that data,
when it's reported to the police
department in time we can save
our video data and use that for
evidence in any kind of
investigation. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, director. So. I'll
make it really short, but I
wanted to ask something else
that you mentioned about how we
can help with with car thieves
in the city. And I'd like to see
if I read an article recently
last week about how this lady
were able to find her stolen car
through looking at the her
citations on her car wreck
record. So director tumblin, I
wonder what can we do to help
people get their stolen car back
and then how are we how can we
alleviate these financial
burdens of those tickets that
these poor car owners end up
having to live with? But they
weren't the one that actually
make the decision to park in an
illegal spot. So how can we help
them and also maybe work
together with sfpd and it just
leave it all to you? An open
ended question. Yes. No, that's
a very timely question. So the
mayor issued a directive last
week following that san
francisco chronicle story
ordering us to collaborate with
the san francisco police
department to make sure that we
that our databases could talk to
each other and that we could not
only identify stolen vehicles,
but also like not not cite the
owner of the rightful owner of
that vehicle for a violation.
This has caused us to do an
investigate mission into why we
are no longer able to do that.
So we used to be able to
automatically do that and I was
mistaken in the underlying
reasons why. So one of the
things that I had understood was
that the city's privacy
ordinance was an obstacle that
is not correct from our current
understanding that there is an
administrative process that we
MAY need to go through in order
to allow databases to talk to
each other. But the burden for
solving this problem is on the
sfmta. So we had legacy software
that we had been using that
software is no longer being
maintained. And so what we need
to do is just defined the api or
updated software in order to
allow the databases to talk to
each other. Again and that work
is the responsibility of the
sfmta and we are working hard on
it. And in the meantime, um, we
do try to make it very easy. So
sometimes as our parking control
officers make mistakes or
sometimes a motorist was doing
something in good faith and
inadvertently gets a parking
citation, we try to make it very
easy to protest citations and
many citations can be dismissed
administratively. So so there's
a form online that's easy to
find just sfmta dismissed
parking citation or protest
citation and so long as somebody
has evidence, it's like a police
report that my car was stolen.
It is very easy for us to
dismiss those citations that
were that were written despite
the good faith of the individual
motorist. We don't. We don't
ever want to be in the position
of compounding harm that our
residents face. Uh, yeah. I
trust that we don't want to do
that. And I just wanted to see
if anything that you need. The
board's help to continue to
expedite that effort. I think
that will we're all open here to
help you. Yes both thank you for
that. The board of supervisors
includes PRESIDENT Peskin has
expressed as well the desire
that if there's any legislative
fix that's necessary, that we
will fix it. I believe all of
the problem rest on my shoulders
and with with our staff team. So
we will get moving on making
that happen. Thank you. Thank
you, director. So, um, I just
wanted to comment also on the
just pause on the ab 645 victory
as well. Colleagues, I attended
the celebration event that
walkoff put on last night and
I'm sort of still pinching
myself that this is the world
that we're living in now, which
is a world where something we
thought for so long was not
possible is in fact not come to
pass. It's really quite
remarkable. And I do want to
just shout out continued to
staff kate breen, though she's
on vacation. Katie angotti,
though she just had a baby when
no ricardo julia for their work
shaping the bill and of course
just you jeff for having the
sharp focus and reminding people
again and again this is such a
barrier to our efforts. And also
just for putting in the work
yourself and making trips to
sacramento and getting this
across the finish line. I also
want to just acknowledge the
mayor and her staff for coming
out early in support on this
bill and that encouraged so many
other cities to get on board.
And then just thank you to the
staff, the advocates and
community and anybody else who
did anything else to get this
bill across the finish line.
It's really a remarkable victory
, and I hope we can all just
really pause and celebrate this
moment. That's all I had. If
there are no other director
comments, I'm going to open it
up for public comment on the
director report. Sorry, that's
going to be item nine is not is
so we're on seven now, then
eight, then nine. Yep. Hi. Board
members. Luke bornheimer first,
I want to thank director tomlin
staff and the board, especially
chair ekin and walk san
francisco and the san francisco
bicycle coalition for their work
and advocacy on ab 645 and speed
enforcement cameras. Speed
enforcement cameras will make
the 33 streets that they're
installed on likely in 2025
safer. That said, there's no
good reason to wait until 2025
to install these cameras or more
red light cameras, which the
agency hasn't used its full
authority to install more of or
install faster. And we need the
agency to choose locations for
speed enforcement cameras and
install them as soon as
possible. Ideally in the first
half of 2024 since director
hemminger mentioned arm traffic
enforcement by sfpd, I think
it's important to highlight what
we know will make our streets
safer and directly address our
roadway safety crisis, as well
as our climate crisis. Our
public health crisis and car
traffic and noise and air
pollution in our city. The
single best thing we can do to
address this all of these things
is create a connected network of
protected bike lanes throughout
our city, starting construction
immediately be a connected
network of protected bike lanes
will make more people feel safe
using bikes, scooters and other
forms of active transportation
to get around our city. And we
can start creating that
connected network of protected
bike lanes. Now for example, by
agendizing and approving the
17th street quick build project,
which has been purposefully
delayed through private
discussions within the city. We
do not need to wait for the
active communities plan to be
finalized and approved. We can
and should start immediately. I
urge you to direct director
tumlin and staff to start
installing a connected network
of protected bike lanes
immediately. We need you to lead
for our city in the planet.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Hi, stacy
randecker and ditto all of that
that luke just said. And
director tomlin, I think you
forgot to mention the
sponsorship of the san francisco
city football club. It's a
brilliant placement for muni.
I'm glad to see it. I'm a
potrero mom of a footballer who
practices at beach chalet. If we
could get travel times to and
from all of our soccer pitches
to 45 minutes or less, it would
be truly golden. And about our
small business owners, can we
turn those merchant corridors
into pedestrian ized places? If
busses are not easily rerouted,
making it transit only is
possible. Cities all over the
world do this, including the
very exotic san jose who has
transit on a pedestrian ized
plaza. If we really want to do
right by our by our merchants,
we would look to the throngs of
people that are out for every
sunday streets saturdays on
valencia, weekends on hayes and
that glorious night market that
was out in the sunset. We can
get goods to merchants. We can
ensure accessibility for those
who need it. We need these
spaces for the vibrancy of san
francisco and to meet our safety
and climate goals. Could we
please stop wringing our hands
on this and get moving to work
for everyone? And yay for speed
cameras? But and we will always
need something like this. But
streets with concrete protected
bike lanes, concrete diverters
at the ends every few blocks and
chicanes with manny's redwood
groves are impossible to speed
upon. Thank you. Thank you. Any
other speakers in the room on
the director's report? Otherwise
let's open, please. Remote at
this time we'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should dial star three
to enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
for speaker. Thank you. I hope
you can hear me. Chair amanda,
you can o. Olivia dew point for
the record, she and her I talk
about the director's report.
Very good report. I'm excited
about the lighting improvements.
I'm very cognizant of that when
I'm in the stations and tunnels
and just want to get the best
technology that we can. I have
actually have entire led
lighting in my home. So it works
and the tunnel work is very,
very important to me. You know,
hear people talk much about
that. But I'm very passionate
about the tunnel and it's not
easy getting across the city. If
there's issues with that tunnel.
My resume with the twin peaks
tunnel is not very long. Going
back to about 2009. But I do
have 43 years of experience
using the north river tunnels,
which are under the hudson river
between new york and new jersey.
And they were opened in NOVEMBER
of 1910. And they are really
getting old and sometimes it's
scary riding through those. I
rode through those a couple of
weeks ago. And so we don't want
to let our tunnel get to that
point. And yes, there were some
other issues with in new york
city with the superstorm, but
still, we have to keep after the
tunnel. And I appreciate the
explanation about how this
tunnel works because I thought
it was just concrete all the way
through making this 30s. So
that's very important
legislation. We're doing. All
right. I'm generally in
alignment that I'm not really an
expert on that. And I did hear a
mention about director yekusiel.
I said it right. I can't say I
ever really met director
yekusiel, but I wish very well.
I really do. And maybe, maybe,
perhaps, maybe I will meet up in
new york city subway. True. Your
time is up next. Speaker.
Herbert weiner, director tumlin
pointed out the importance of
small businesses to the economy
and thriving of san francisco.
Now it should be noted with the
institute of corridors on
mission street, taraval street
and now gary street, small
businesses have folded. And what
is going to be done about the
restitution of these small
businesses? The projects
resulted in diminishing revenue
and too many businesses, small
businesses had to give up shop.
So my concern is the restitution
of small businesses and the
advocacy of it in the light of
mta projects which were actually
detrimental to them. Thank you.
Thank you. Next speaker. Hello
good afternoon. This is barry
toronto. I want to wish director
yekutiel hallelujah to him after
what he witnessed in the last
week or so. I would blame him
for changing his priorities and
for stepping down. But I want to
thank him for his help with
working with small businesses,
including taxis. The problem is
we can't get enforcement at taxi
stands and we are small
businesses providing a service
for people to go and frequent
small businesses in different
areas as well. But but we can't
get enforcement at the cab
stands in these in these small
business areas, such as 24th and
mission, which brings about the
bill about harassment of female
pco's while they're giving
tickets over there. So it'd be
great if they were protected
while they're giving tickets at
the cab stand at 24th and
mission. But we can't get any
help. We can't get any
enforcement. So and the next
thing about getting
congratulations on. Ab 645 the
only problem is what do we do
about the errant scooter riders
who run red lights and speed
through crosswalks and also
pedestrians who take risks and
walk while the light is green in
the opposing direction at
intersections, the for the word
is no longer a good word of
jaywalking. But you taking your
life in your own hands when you
are crossing the street, when
you have the red light at the
pedestrian. So I think at the
same time, while promoting this
speed camera program, you're
also promoting that pedestrians
also observe the walk signals.
Thank you very much for your
time. And I'm surprised you
didn't mention anything about
jaime parks and tom maguire.
Thank you. Callers. Okay that
will close public comment.
Please call the next item lisa
is you on item number eight, the
citizens advisory council report
. Good afternoon, directors.
It's a pleasure to address you
today. Director yukkuri will
allow me to, on behalf of the
cac, thank you for your service.
We're sorry you're leaving the
board, but we've always
appreciated your passion for
small businesses, us, and
especially for the riders of san
francisco and especially
district eight. So thank you. We
had three presentations at our
last meeting. It was a long one.
The first one was on the 2024
legislative program and our
motion was as follows. The sf
mta cac recommends that the
sfmta board adopt the 2024
legislative program priorities
as presented. I'm assuming they
are coming to you soon and so
you'll see the same
presentation. We saw something
similar next. We had a very long
presentation on the valencia
bikeway pilot, which has been
rather I know you've received a
lot of feedback about it. We've
received a lot of feedback about
it. Not much of if any of it
positive. And our recommendation
is as follows the sfmta cac
recommends abandoning the
current unintuitive and
dangerous center running bicycle
lane pilot on valencia and
refocusing the street toward its
core needs commercial
deliveries. Bicyclists outdoor
diners and pedestrians by
pursuing a road geometry that
disincentivizes nonresidential
traffic. And finally, we also
heard a very interesting
presenter session on autonomous
vehicles, which everyone is very
interested in as of late. And
our recommendation is as follows
the sfmta cac endorses the sfmta
sfcta and sf planning
commission's request for a
rehearing of the california
public utilities commission
AUGUST 10th, 2023. Approval of
unlimited numbers of cruise and
waymo vehicles charging for
passenger rides 24 over seven in
all neighborhoods of the city
without doubt, an environmental
impact report. Again, we I think
like staff, we think there
should be a greater level of
transparency on autonomous
vehicles and how they're working
or not working in san francisco
streets for to the benefit of
everyone. Thank you all for your
time. Colleagues, do you have
questions for chair lee for. I
did, if you wouldn't mind.
Please go ahead. Director hinsey
yeah. Um, I. Jennifer, thank you
for your engagement. For those
of us who missed the meeting, we
know about your recommendation
for valencia, but if you could
provide a little bit more color
as to maybe some of the reasons
why your members might, might
have landed on the
recommendation that you did,
that would be I'd be interested
in know just a little bit about
tenor, that discussion. Sure,
sure. For the motion was not
unanimously passed. And I think
some people on the council were
very concerned and we heard
feedback from small businesses
that are very concerned about
having access to being able to
park and for their employees. As
we heard from a local bar owner
who is in danger of losing her
business that she's had for
many, many years. I think some
of us were swayed by that. And
also, again, we've heard
consistent feedback from
cyclists that the middle bikeway
is unsafe. They don't like it,
they don't want to use it, and
they either want to move to a
geometry that has a protected
bike lane on the outside of the
street rather than in the center
of the street, which would
require I mean, it's valencia is
not a big street. It's small.
And something's going to have to
give. And I think the thing that
people think might have to give
would be through traffic, which
could probably be routed onto
guerrero, which has a lot of
traffic on it or mission, which
has traffic on it as well. Um
thank you for the thank you for
that additional information.
Very helpful. Sure. My pleasure.
Ucucha. What do you mean? Get
rid of through traffic? I'm
sorry. What traffic does? What
does that mean? Exactly? What
traffic I didn't getting rid of
through traffic. Like cars that
are just driving down valencia
like a non resident because
there are residences on
valencia. So residents would
want to have access to the
street but not like people just
driving down valencia. So the
idea would be to have it be
restricted to like folks that
live on valencia would be the
only ones that could drive on
it. Hypothetically. Yes I think
that's kind of what they were
what we were leaning towards.
Okay, thanks. Sure thank you. I
also had sort of some follow up
questions specifically on this
last phrase, which is by
pursuing a road geometry that
disincentivizes non residential
traffic. Just wondering if you
could bring us in on your
thinking. Were there are certain
like scenarios you had talked
about or what led the commission
to make this decision? Again, I
think those who supported the
motion were really wanting
something more where valencia is
more pedestrianized and I think
that's kind of where they were.
I think that's where they were
trending. And it was it was
compromised language that we
worked out to try and get them
to get the motion passed because
I think some folks wanted pretty
much no cars at all. Other folks
wanted cars. So we could have so
it would be much more aggressive
to say for businesses and things
like that. But I think this was
sort of the compromise that was
reached. I don't know if that
fully answers your question. No,
it's helpful. That's helpful.
DR. Tumlin, can you remind us
when the update is coming on
valencia street? We talked
about, I think DECEMBER when we
adopted it. I see sitting in the
back livable streets lead. Jamie
parks as well as soon to be
acting livable streets lead.
Kimberly leong, who's the
currently the project manager
for valencia yeah. Sorry hop on
in. Hi kimberly liang, the
project manager for the valencia
bikeway project. We plan to
return as soon as JANUARY 2024.
We're in the process of
collecting data right now for
the project, and we've asked her
to come back so we can give you
a recommendation on on the pilot
extension, because I think
you're looking whether or not to
extend the pilot in JANUARY.
Right so in JANUARY. When we
return, we'll have information
from our three month evaluation
mark. And as a part of that,
we'll have any recommendations
for where we should head next
with this pilot, whether it be
improvements or adjustments that
need to be made. Okay. Thank
you. Yeah. It's our intention to
give you a recommendation as
well. Once we hear the data.
Okay thank you for your report
and for your service. Oh, sorry.
I didn't see you. Yes, director.
So go ahead. Oh, sorry. Sorry
I'm always a little today. I'm a
little bit lag of my, my
response was delayed, so I
apologize. Thank you, chair.
Thank you for sharing. All your
input is very, very insightful
and really liked it. And I keep
thinking I actually live in the
mission and I've seen the
evolution of what's happening in
valencia and yeah, we need to
continue to refine this. And I
like most part of your
recommendations and I just keep
thinking your last sentences,
which our chair had brought up,
if you can elaborate. And I
thought of this morning, I spent
my whole morning holding hands
with one of my really senior
mentor just to walk ten steps up
to the alamo square park. And I
know that I have a lot of my
mentors that are actually we
enjoy time to go to nice
restaurant. And so spend like a
morning and lunch or dinner. So
if we can you explain to me your
recommendation. So how am I
going to get my mentor to
actually enjoy these restaurants
on valencia if she can actually
walk really just just five steps
or ten steps? I'm just looking
at people who actually can't
bike, can row. Right. And they
are relying on paratransit or
their loved ones if they're
lucky and fortunate enough to
have the resource, to have their
loved ones actually drive them,
to get them to where they can go
to, to have their normal social
life or sometimes simply some
efficacy of community work. So I
just wanted to see if you your,
your your group had thought
about the equity component of
that was that yeah, we did get a
comment. A public comment like
that. And personally I think
that's a very insightful comment
and something that needs to be
considered as we again try to
figure out all of the competing
priorities for that very slim
street. But yeah, some people, a
car is the only option really,
especially if we're not running
transit down valencia anymore,
which we aren't. It's and it's
not really fair to say, well
it's only a block away and,
well, a block can be a mile for
some people. Exactly I think
that's a very good point. Okay.
Would you would is a good point.
Would you would you refine your
recommendation or maybe bring it
back into to us to see what you.
I think that's something we'll
need to consider once we get the
data and we come back with a
recommendation in JANUARY. That
would be great. Thank you. Thank
you. Director hensley has a
question for you as well. Sure I
do. Sorry, charlie, for to put
you on the hot seat today. But
you did you did mention that you
intend to come back to us with a
recommendation. So I'm trying to
figure out what your recommend
for us today is or should we be
should we be holding off
basically until you come back
with your. I think the
recommendation in JANUARY. Yeah,
that's a good no, that's a good
point. I think the thrust of the
council's recommendation today
is moving away from the center
bike lane. I think that's the
real that's the meat of it. And
then but you're still going to
wait until the project is
evaluated to come and write
another recommendation. Yes I
think we felt that since staff
was going to issue a
recommendation to you in JANUARY
, we thought we would chime in
as well. Okay got it. Okay.
Thank you for your service. You
bet. Let's open public comment
on the cac report items, please,
for those in the room. Thank you
. Thank you. Hi. Board members.
Luke bornheimer, I urge you to
take the cac unprecedented
mmendation and direct staff
to immediately replace this
valencia street center bikeway
with either curbside protected
bike lanes or pedestrianization
of the street, which can include
access for commercial
deliveries. Local residents and
people with disabilities. As
more people are crashing or
being hit, killed or injured on
valencia with the center bikeway
and significantly more than the
portion of valencia where
curbside protected bike lanes
were installed in 2019 and
multiple evaluation by sfmta
staff showed that cars parked in
the bike lane decrease their 99.
Close calls decreased to 100,
and the number of people biking
increased 49. Curbside protected
bike lanes work phenomenally
well. Improved safety for all
people, including drivers, and
increase revenue for local
businesses and they can be
installed on valencia using
quick build materials in months,
if not weeks in an email, sfmta
staff told me they didn't create
a design for curbside protected
bike lanes because the design
wouldn't allow for car parking
on both sides of the street.
Only 56 days after the center
bikeway pilot was officially
started, an 80 year old man was
killed on valencia. Countless
other people have crashed or
been injured as a result of the
center bikeway and even more
have had close calls which could
have resulted in them being
killed or seriously injured,
including a mom with a kid on
her bike. About a week ago, the
people of san francisco and our
planet need you to take
immediate action to make
valencia safer for people,
better for business and
effective for fighting climate
change. I urge you to take the
unprecedented recommendation in
and direct staff to immediately
replace the valencia street
center, bikeway with either
curbside protected bike lanes or
pedestrianization of the street,
which can include access for
commercial deliveries, local
residents and people with
disabilities. As you are the
only people who can help us and
we need you to take immediate
action to protect us, our
businesses and the planet. Thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker,
please. Hi, stacy randecker. I
could talk all day about
valencia, but I did want to say
to director so, so I agree with
everything that luke said,
although I'm all for
pedestrianization for as much of
the corridor that it makes sense
at this time. I think at the
lower end and the protected bike
lanes are working fine and it
doesn't have quite the vibe that
the center of, of valencia does.
As for your mentor and friend, I
totally understand my dad who
recently passed, he was he
couldn't walk either. It would
have been an issue for him. But
what I would say is what do you
do when you take them to the
airport? What do you do when you
take them to the mall? That's
the same thing that we would ask
to be done for valencia. We do
not want to limit accessibility
to anyone when we're talking
about pedestrianization, but we
have to change our mind about
what accessibility really means.
As I was out on valencia, I've
been out there the last three
saturday nights all night that
it's closed and the things that
I've seen the people in the
mobility scooters, the dad with
the teen daughter with a like a
glider sort of apparatus,
there's it's so wide. There's
nowhere else you can go. You
could never do that on a
sidewalk. You could only do that
on like jfk. Great highway when
it's closed or a place like
valencia, I don't know where
they live. I was too know I
didn't want to go bother them,
but it just was like where does
she have to go? Like this to see
the little kids out on their
strider bikes and stuff? We
don't have that on our side of
town. We need spaces like this.
It does so much for the
merchants. And if it's not
working, then we have to figure
out how to make it work. Our
city and our planet, the people
who live here, we need it to be
more livable. We need it to be a
place where people can go and
want to go. And there it's full
of life. Not just cars. We can
do this. We need as an agency,
as the city. We need to start
saying how can we do it
differently? Not like what is
the problem? What is the one off
case? How do we solve for as
much as possible? That's what we
need to move forward. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other speakers in
the room for item eight? Seeing
none, please open the phone at
this time we'll move to remote
public comment, not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment on item number eight
should dial star three to enter
the queue. Each speaker will
have two minutes. Moderator for
speaker. Hello. Good afternoon
again and sorry toronto. As you
know, valencia street already is
traffic calming because you you
have to stop in every every
light down valencia street
unless you're going really slow.
So it's already not lights are
not timed. The only problem is
you can't get off of valencia
street because you can't make
any left turns in that area. So
the center. So I applaud the for
wanting to abandon in this
failed experiment of the center
running bike lane. I also want
to applaud the cac for endorsing
the rehearing request by the
city attorney and the city
departments just the other night
at bill graham civic auditorium,
there was a rave like event
going on at and one of the
autonomous vehicles ran into the
barrier blocking grove street
between larkin and paul. It does
not recognize these items that
close streets off temporarily.
So there has it has to go back
to the drawing board to deal
with these. Unlike unlikely
situations that their autonomous
vehicles can't figure out. Thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you. Next speaker.
Afternoon, directors. This is
cyrus hall. I'm calling as a
bike rider who rides in valencia
sometimes I'm frustrated to hear
that agency will not be bringing
an update until JANUARY on the
valencia bike lane. The number
of issues that have been
reported. We've had a death.
We've had a number of injuries.
Is calls for more urgency on
this issue than waiting until
JANUARY. I want to give a couple
examples. When you're writing
down the center bike lane and
sfpd decides that they don't
decide they have an emergency
and they're using the center
lane to get to where they're
going as quickly as possible.
You as a writer have nowhere to
go. You do. You have to bet that
other traffic is going to behave
perfectly and cautiously as you
try to escape the oncoming
vehicle while in the lane. I
don't know how this wasn't
thought about when this was when
this was designed. The bike turn
boxes are death traps. No one
wants to use them. No one wants
to be in those boxes because it
requires drivers to behave
perfectly and drivers don't
behave perfect. I urge a faster
sped up analysis of the
incidents the agency is aware of
and quicker action on this issue
. Thank you very much. Thank you
. No additional speakers. I'll
close public comment. I see
director hemminger has a comment
. Thank you, MADAM Chair. And I
apologize for not raising this
earlier. You know, I fear that
we're headed toward another show
on valencia in JANUARY. If all
we're going to be talking about
is the results of the pilot with
the center running lane. I
believe I made the point when we
originally considered this item
that we really only had one
option in front of us and that
it was worthwhile doing being a
pilot and doing an evaluation
session. But it sort of compared
to what an and one thing that's
clearly been mentioned is a more
traditional protected bike lane
on the outside, which obviously
is going to interfere with
parking given the geometry of
the road. And the other one is
what we've done on market, which
is to eliminate private vehicles
, which comes with its own set
of trouble, but it strikes me
that if we only have one option
in front of us again, we're
liable to get the same result,
which is a room full of unhappy
people on each side, determined
that they've got the point of
view. I mean, some of the
testimony now is getting a
little bit ideological and I
thought one of our purposes was
to try to turn down the
temperature a little bit. So,
jeff, maybe you could just give
us a sense of your expectation
of how much work we can do to by
JANUARY or if it's a month or so
later, whatever, in having 2 or
3 legitimate options on the
table instead of just one with a
bunch of people shooting yes and
no at it. So excuse me, chair,
MAY I interrupt? Deputy city
attorney susan cleveland-knowles
I did just want to remind the
board that the item that was
agendized today was a report
from the cac and that the
broader topic of valencia is not
on the agenda today. So think if
jeff wants to give a brief
response, I think that's fine.
But we should probably in their
report was this item, right?
Yeah right. But this is you've
asked questions and sought
clarification from the cac about
their resolution on which was
the identified object. Not a
full not a full discussion of
valencia. And so I would just
urge some caution. I mean, I
think we can respond to director
hemings's question, but but it's
just really about what the cac
reported to you, what I am
hearing is direction from
director hemminger that when we
come back to you in JANUARY,
that we evaluate an array of
options. Yeah. In short, that's
it. So if you're going to do
that, I'm happy and I hope our
council is happy to. Yeah, I'm
no issues. Sorry, I didn't know
how long the discussion was
going to go on. Thank you. Okay
thank you. Let's please call the
next item. Next item. Very good.
Item number nine. General public
comment. Members of the public
MAY address the board of
directors on matters that are
within the board's jurisdiction,
but not on today's calendar
hour. I do have a speaker card
for stacy randecker. Okay go
ahead. Hi, my name is rex
ridgeway. I'm the PRESIDENT Of
the ptsa at lincoln high school.
And I'm here to talk about a
situation with the number 48
bus. This is a condensed
timeline of correspondence from
our assistant principal to a
person who works at the here. I
won't name the name, but I'll
just give you the date.
SEPTEMBER 20th, 26. The 40. The
number 48. Number 8657 stopped
by this school, did not open the
doors and drove off without
picking up anybody. SEPTEMBER
27th. Thank you for your time
with us. The 48 number 8847 was
listed as not in service and
just drove by by OCTOBER second
48. Number three, 48 busses on
friday after school drove by our
kids and did not pick them up.
The bus numbers were eight,
eight, 98812 and 8888. OCTOBER
3rd two weeks ago. Our assistant
principal emailed this
individual and said, I know that
you are investigating. Do you
have any follow up? Our
community is wondering if
there's any improvement since
you notified us. And to my
knowledge as of this morning,
two weeks have passed and we
don't know what's going on. So
I'm here because I have time and
I would like to. And the
assistant principal called me
and said, rex, can you do
something? I said, I'll make a
public comment. Thank you. So,
sir, the board can't address
your item, but al ramos, who's
in the audience, can direct you
to the right folks in our
transit division. Okay. Thank
you so much. Thank you for your
comment. Next speaker, please.
Hi. Board members. Luke
bornheimer. I urge you to
immediatove a citywide
no turn on red policy and direct
staff to create a plan for
implementing that policy as soon
as possible to make it safer,
easier and more comfortable for
people to cross our streets and
increase safety for all people,
especially for children, seniors
and people with disabilities, as
well as people who walk, bike
and even drivers during your
meeting two weeks ago, the board
of supervisors unanimously
approved supervisor preston's
resolution urging you to approve
a citywide no turn on red policy
on the resolution's first
reading of a remarkable event
for the board of supervisors and
a historic moment for our city.
Since the board of supervisors
unanimous approval urging you to
approve a citywide policy. More
than 15 news outlets have
covered the public campaign I
started that's support voters
have sent you and other policy
makers more than 5000 emails in
the san francisco chronicle and
los angeles times covered the
approval. And this morning, the
guardian covered it as well.
This is an amazing opportunity
for you and our city to lead on
a proven street safety
improvement that will make our
streets instantly safer,
especially for children, seniors
and people with disabilities. As
well as people who walk, bike
and drive. I urge you to
immediately approve a citywide
no turn on red policy and direct
staff to create a plan for
implementing that policy as soon
as possible to make it safer,
easier and more comfortable for
people to cross our streets and
increase safety for all people,
especially for children, seniors
and people with disabilities, as
well as people who walk, bike
and even drivers. For anyone who
supports a no turn on red,
please go to or rssf.Com. Thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker,
please. Hi stacy randecker again
. So you all probably know that
we are in a global climate
emergency and even though we
hear do rarely suffer the ill
effects of severe weather, it is
not the case with the rest of
the world. Transportation is the
number one single contributor to
climate change for san
francisco, california and the
united states. We need to change
absolute absolutely everything
about how people and goods move
at the same time, our streets
have been particularly dangerous
for those outside of car.
Instead of reaching vision zero,
we're at zero vision making
effectively no impact in the
near decade since our
supervisors initially resolved
that we would eliminate deaths
from transportation trans base
where sfmta gets its traffic
injury data has not been updated
since MARCH 31st. It has been
without an owner since JULY 1st,
so sfmta, or at least the public
is flying blind. With regard to
the state of our streets, i
realize that eliminating
transportation and greenhouse
gas emissions and traffic deaths
seems like an impossibility. But
we must. And they are absolutely
intertwined. And I am echoing
what I have heard many of you
say that this agency needs to
get creative about making
change, change that our city and
our planet require year. Could
we reinstitute the innovation
position that sfmta once had
someone that is thinking about
how to solve these very large
issues and bring forth a variety
of solutions every time? Could
we have someone that is
responsible for vision zero,
someone that will ensure that
the data is up to date available
to the public completely
comprehensive and reports out
changes to be or a thorough
analysis for keeping the status
quo of our streets. Too often I
hear that. Oh, it's fine, no
changes need to be made. That's
your time. Thank you. We need to
make change. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. I'll make this
quick. My issue today in and
quite frequently is parking
tickets in the city. The number
one thing that says I think that
we should make some changes is
if you google what city has the
most expensive parking tickets?
There's articles that come out.
It's always san francisco at the
top. And we're a city that that
prides herself on on on on
change. And focusing on low
income people. And I think it's
shameful that we have that and
yeah it's very frustrating and I
and I understand you were
talking earlier about the
administrative process for
dismissing citations. I think
that the reasons that you can
give or the reasons that that
citation will be dismissed
administratively are kind of
kept secret. And it's somewhat
of a convoluted process. And
then you have to go to the
second level through the
kangaroo court. And the third
one, you have to pay everything
and then pay more to go before a
real judge. And I've done that
and I won. Yay but it's a
struggle and it lasts months to
get to get a refund. I just
think it's an issue that should
be addressed. And I know you're
following the law, but I think
the city can can go beyond that
and make it more more focused on
on the residents. Thank you.
Thank you. No other speakers in
the room. Please open the remote
public comment at this time.
We'll move to remote public
comment not to exceed a total
time of ten minutes. Members of
the public wishing to comment
should dial star three to enter
the queue. Each speaker will
have two minutes. Moderator
first speaker, thank you. Chair
amanda alito. Dupree for the
record, she and her speak
generally, I'm just an ordinary
user of muni. Maybe I'm one of a
very rare few, but I am. I hope
you hear me all right. And how
do we build the best muni? We
can? I often learn things in
other places. I read about a
program in new jersey on nj
transit called ride kinds and
saying hate has no place, hate
has no seat on our system. Um, I
would like to see us have that
kind of work here at muni
because I want to feel fully
included on muni and I feel very
fortunate that your senior staff
has fully included me and
welcomed me in the things that
muni. But the leadership really
comes from you. So I've been
away from you for a little
while, but I did go to new york
city and I did ride on their
legendary system called a subway
. And every time I wrote it
while wearing a skirt, nobody
tried to stop me from using the
system in new york. I don't
think anybody would do it on
muni, but I ask that you not
entertain any kind of hate on
muni because I want to be able
to use the system fully and
hopefully I'll use the
autonomous vehicles which will
offer me a safe skirt friendly
way for me to traverse the city.
I'm just waiting for my 30s code
. Um. Some of you have not met
me, but I hope to be meet you at
a meeting in person soon along
with the senior staff that has
always welcomed me fully on this
system. Senior staff can can
only do so much because they
work for you. Muni needs. The
tone for muni needs to be set by
you and I ask that you build the
most welcoming system we can. We
can learn from new jersey and
new york. Thank you. Next
speaker. Is herbert weiner. I
wish to speak on the extension
of parking hours. Now you've
pointed out that, you know, you
need extended parking hours for
more revenue, but this could be
greatly offset by the need to
employ additional staff to
enforce the parking hours. So in
essence, the overhead cancels
out the benefits of the revenue.
So I think this is really a self
destructive measure. It's going
to alienate the public. It's
going to hurt businesses, and
it's basically a loser all the
way around. And when you want to
extend those parking hours, you
better think three times before
you do it. This is a very
destructive measure. And it
really will not improve service
delivery from mta. Thank you.
Thank you. Next speaker. Hello.
Good afternoon. This is barry
toronto again. Um, I first want
to applaud you have another
great employee in the taxi
division in addition to peter
woods is scott leone. Scott
leone helps arrange for
temporary taxi stands for
special events. And I appreciate
what he did to help us while the
lesbians who are occupying the
complete block of castro street.
So thank you, scott, for working
on that project. I want to say,
though, is that because your
mobility investigators are
spending more time on scooters,
we're still having the legal
solicitations going on in the
cab staging area, particularly
at chase center. And we're
having a problem with not having
an investigator after concerts
and basketball games there. Now
that basketball season is
starting. Please, please, please
have investigators work the
basketball games. But know you
refuse to do it. You refuse to
do it. Why why? Why? Ask
director tomlin, why am and I
want to applaud director so for
bringing up about the patrons
issue. People get to go to
events at night because of using
the paratransit debit card at
and the subsidized rides so they
can afford and go even though
they're seniors and disabled to
go to a special events and I
hope that you will be able to
allow this allow them to have
access to the events because
we're because if you make it
tough for vehicles like ramp
taxis to get to certain places,
then it's a problem. So again, I
applaud scott leon for making
arrangements so we can have
access during the market street
closure so that lighthouse for
the blind and the mayor's office
of disability. Thank you your
time is up next. Speaker. Good
afternoon, directors. My name is
alex landsberg, research and
advocacy director for the san
francisco electrical
construction industry. I want to
say a couple of things. First of
all, I tuned in late, so maybe I
missed it. But in case you are
or in case other viewers and
listeners haven't heard, san
francisco is going to be hosting
the international public
transportation association's
north american trolley committee
next week. Trolley bus committee
hearing next week in san
francisco. And I think we should
be proud of and following on
that, I wanted to invite you
directors of staff and other
members of the public to you, to
a question and answer session
with andres restrepo and jose
valentin restrepo from the
universidad pontificia boulevard
. Diana I worked with them to
show how san francisco can
quickly electrify more than 200
miles of diesel powered muni
routes at a lower cost and with
fewer environmental impacts and
lower operational costs than
currently envisioned by through
the battery electric bus
program. Our report shows how we
and we're bringing andre san
jose valentin up from medellin
to answer questions, have a
little reception ahead of the
uitp people can rsvp at
eventbrite. You can find it in
eventbrite or at l, igad dot me.
So with periods in there, it's a
kind of lead me slash emcee
trolleys. Next tuesday, 6:00 at
the ibew hall at 55 fillmore
thanks. Thank you. Next speaker.
Can you hear me now? Yes. Go
ahead. Great. David pilpel two
points, I think. Barry toronto
earlier made referee to two
people, leaving the mta staff. I
understand that one of them is
tom maguire, who will be leaving
mta soon. I wish him well,
although he is not perfect. None
of us are. He's a human being,
but he, in my opinion, he's been
a very decent and honest person
at mta and mta could certainly
use more decent and honest
people. And I think it's a big
loss for mta management and for
the city. So I wish him well.
And if anyone can straighten out
bart to san jose, good luck to
him on that. On a separate topic
, the board of supervisors just
voted to limit remote public
comment at its meetings. I think
that was a bad policy choice and
I hope mta will not follow suit
and do so. Thanks for listening.
Thank you. No additional
speakers. Okay, let's close
public comment and move to the
next item. Directors that places
you on item ten consent
calendar. These items are
considered to be routine and
will be acted upon by a single
vote unless a member of the
board or public wishes to
consider an item separately for
all speakers. Providing public
comment, please identify which
item number you are speaking to
and I will announce that item
10.2 a to establish a shared
spaces shared spaces road
closure on hay street between
gough and octavia streets has
been severed from the consent
calendar and will be heard
separately. Item 10.1. Go ahead
and I'm going to read off
requesting the controller to
allocate funds and to draw
warrants against such funds
available or will be available
in payment of the following
claims against the sfmta. That's
items a and b in the agenda item
10.2 approving various routine
parking and traffic
modifications and making
environmental review findings.
Items b and c and the agenda and
item 10.3 amending
transportation code division
two, section 801 for permit
parking on hyde street between
mcallister and grove streets,
leavenworth street, between
golden gate avenue and
mcallister street and larkin
street between mcallister and
grove streets to support transit
improvements along hyde street
and the relocation of the heart
of the city farmers market to
fulton street. That concludes
your consent calendar. Thank
you. Secretary silva. I will
open now public comment for
anyone in the room on our
consent calendar minus item
10.2. A seeing none. Please open
remote at this time. We'll move
to remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator first speaker
great david paypal again, i
assume I can be heard. I just
had a brief comment on item
10.3. I don't think it needs to
be pulled. I note that page two
of the staff report has a
section on stakeholder
engagement, but really only
discusses what stakeholder
engagement occurred and does not
really summarize the input
gleaned from that stakeholder
engagement that is not the same
as some of the other items that
have some different and in some
cases more discussion on
stakeholder engagement. I think
it's important to have that
section in staff reports and I
think it's important not just to
document what stakeholder
engagement events occurred and
what mta staff broadcast to the
stakeholders, but what input was
received from stakeholders and
much more importantly, what
changes were made to the
proposals as a result of that
stakeholder engagement. And this
applies not just to item 10.3,
but throughout to all items
today and in the future. Thanks
for listening. Thank you. No
additional speakers. Okay, we'll
close public comment on consent,
-10.2 a MAY I have a motion for
my colleagues, please? So moved.
Thank you. Please call the roll
on the motion to approve the
consent calendar. Item 10.2. A
severed director. Heminger
heminger. Director henderson.
Henderson and I director hinsey.
I director. So I so I director
uk'otoa uk'otoa I director gina
I coquina regan. Hi egon. I
thank you. The consent calendar
is approved. Okay. Please call
item 10.2. A item 10.2 a to
establish a shared spaces road
closure on hay street between
gough and octavia streets from
saturday, OCTOBER 21st, 2023
through saturday, OCTOBER 19,
2024. 1 P.M. To 10 P.M. Each
saturday. We have staff here.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair egan
directors. Thank you so much for
having me this afternoon. My
name is monica minich. I'm the
program manager of shared spaces
and happy to be presenting to
you all today on the application
we've received and have been
working closely with the
community on to close the 400
block of hay street and hayes
valley as part of the shared
spaces post-pandemic program.
Um, I prepared a brief
presentation on the background
of the application and program
and what led us to the
recommendation, the staff
recommendation here in front of
you today. So shared spaces is
was established over the
pandemic. It was intended to
make a place outside possible
for the neighborhood and
business districts and
restaurants and businesses to be
outside when it wasn't safe to
operate indoors through in the
form of parklets roadway
closures, sidewalk tables and
chairs when it really was such a
desperate time to be outdoors,
it brought people together. It
brought communities together. It
really was a delight and has
continued to be a delight
throughout our city. In the
summer of 2021, the mayor signed
legislation to make shared
spaces permanent and here to
stay to allow our economy and
business districts and small
businesses to continue to
leverage this and activate our
public spaces, shared spaces for
street closures are typically
approved by the
inter-departmental staff
committee of traffic and
transportation. This is chaired
by sfmta with representation
from public works fire
department fire. Fire
department. Police entertainment
commission. Public health. But
this application is brought to
you today as the board to take
action because of the 21 muni
route that serves this street
and the reroute needed to
accommodate this closure, which
requires a necessitates the
board share shared spaces versus
slow streets two programs that
started during the pandemic,
each very different and I just
want to highlight so we're sort
of this is covered and
intentionally sort of discuss
the differences between both
programs. Shared spaces are
intended to be destinations.
These are intended to be on
commercial corridors. They have
sponsors that are responsible
for activating the space and
setting it up, and they are
recurring, recurring in nature.
These are different than blocks
that MAY be closed for a special
event shared spaces are
recurring slow streets, as we're
well aware, are on residential
corridors. These are traffic on
streets that are slow and
accommodate all modes of
transportation. It's a really a
new sort of framework and
typology for people to get from
point a to point b, this is a
form of mobility. Shared spaces.
Some things we look at, although
not required, but most shared
spaces throughout the city and
from the post-pandemic permanent
program. I think we've permitted
about over 30 of them are
typically on streets without
public transit, bike lanes on
low volume streets without fire
or emergency c or medical
facilities and likely few
driveways. So there's not a lot
of public access needed to be
maintained. So not not possible,
but additional analysis like
hayes street MAY be required to
confirm feasible city. So now to
get into a little bit more of
the specifics on hay street,
when on the 21 hayes bus line
was not operating during the
pandemic, the hayes valley
neighborhood association and
hayes valley merchant council
applied for a street closure on
the three, four and 500 block
for fridays, saturdays and
sundays. And they operated in
that configuration for, I
believe, well over a year. There
were some iterations of the
permit during that time, notably
the end of 2021. It was scaled
to be its current form of 400
block only for friday, saturday
and sundays due to community
opposition and traffic
circulation issues. Then fast
forward. To summer 2022, the 21
hayes came back and we were able
to find a way to work with the
community to continue to reroute
muni to serve and allow the
closure to happen every friday,
saturday and sunday. And that's
what's been in place since the
pandemic program ended in MARCH
2023. So we've been in this
transition and hayes valley
merchants council submit an
application to continue the
closure friday, saturday and
sundays, fridays for 210
saturdays, sundays, 10 A.M. To
10 P.M. In the post-pandemic
program. And just a high level
to orient the three 400 block
that we've been speaking and
we'll be speaking most about
today is that block between
gough and octavia, 300 between
franklin and gough, and the 500
block is between octavia and
laguna. Hayes street has been a
beloved community space during
the pandemic. Residents report
it loving to walk and gather and
be in this space. And some
businesses have noted additional
foot traffic, foot traffic that
has supported their business
during the pandemic time over
the course of the permit. The
closure has also experiences
some challenges. Many merchants
we've worked with and spoken to
would like to see more regular
activation of the space sponsors
have a lot of responsibility
when they close the street. They
have to set up the barricades,
take them down, activate the
space and in inspecting the
closure during the period that
it was activated ad the
applicant was not able to do
this reliably. The barricades,
for example, were not always set
up at the same location, and we
were really committed to working
closely with them and came up
actually with a revised
barricade set up within the last
year that reduced the ability or
the need to have staffing at the
intersection. The staffing was
needed to move barricades in the
event of an emergency, and we
worked together as a city team
revise the barricades set up to
eliminate the staff need that
there really having a challenge
to do consistently and reliably.
unfortunately I think with
inspections, we still were
seeing inconsistency in setting
up the barricades during that
time. Other notable things that
we've observed and have been
reported and many merchants talk
about the traffic congestion
affecting their businesses,
particularly on the 300 block is
illustrated here for and the
impacts just to general
circulation having on their
customers and on the business
deliveries and pickups needed to
support their businesses. Lastly
we've had a lot of reports on
double parking at the
intersection as particularly at
gough and also on octavia
blocking the barricades and
really becoming a traffic safety
and emergency access issue.
We've also received reports from
muni about the reroute over the
course of the pandemic, about
passengers impacted from the new
bus stops friday, saturdays and
sundays every week. Two
operators sort of trying to
navigate the closure. I
understand. And the friday
service operates out of the
presidio yard. Our trolley bus
overhead wires, which are
uniquely a little bit less
nimble and how they come off
wire and have to reroute that is
presented just on fridays
compared to the service on
saturday and sundays. So some of
the observations have been
reported and identified over the
last couple of years. This
summer, staff convened
stakeholders upon receiving the
application to continue in the
post pandemic program and met
with merchant and neighborhood
groups and really tried to all
come together. Those that oppose
and support all in one space to
provide a space and a seat at
the table to hear concerns and
identify sustainable solutions.
So while I'm here presenting
this today, the recommendations
that we bring in front of you
are really a representation of
our work with the neighborhood
and the merchants advocates, the
office of small business, the
fire department, the mayor's
office, and our recommendations
really are a direct result of
all of that feedback, like. So
to get into now more specifics
on what the proposal that was
brought forward to the to the
group of stakeholders we met
with as a result of those
conversations, there's a common
theme the community loves this
space and they want to see it
continue in some form. They want
it to be activated and well
managed, monitored for safety
and consistent and reflect the
diverse needs of the corridor.
So I'll briefly list out all of
these and I have some follow up
slides to go into them in more
detail. But one of the main
recommendations was scaling back
to a one day only closure,
having it be more intentional so
we could focus the resources and
set it up for success so they
can see and build upon that
success and that stability and
the sponsor being able to
activate the space. We were open
to the day and try to sort of
feedback. If it was one day with
friday feel better saturdays and
sundays and ultimately at
present suggested a saturday
because of the level of activity
on that day compared to a
sunday, for example. Well we'd
like to see more regular
activation. There are resources
for this. The shared spaces
program in and of itself has an
arts and culture grant that they
could apply for to get things
like music and art and really
enliven the space. And then we
also have a host of signage and
wayfinding requirements and
ideas to bring forth that will
hopefully manage the space
better, that include includes
this new barricade setup that we
developed with working with fire
department and our engineers
that places the barricades out
side of the crosswalk instead of
inside of the crosswalk. This
hopefully eliminates the
additional space and sort of
invites the double parking, the
illegal parking that we were
seeing at the intersection. So
we propose this at octavia and
at sorry, at gough and octavia
with that sort of art shape with
a similar thread of thinking,
sort of reducing that extra
space that was there with the
barricade setup during the
pandemic. And then the
additional wayfinding and
loading and signage just to walk
through that here on southbound
gough, we like to put a no right
turn ahead sign up so that it's
clear to drivers coming down
southbound on gough that hay
street is closed and they can
circulate through the
neighborhood hopefully easier.
We've legislated new commercial
and passenger loading zones on
hayes just south I'm sorry on
gough just south of hayes as
well as new passenger loading
zone in the works on octavia
just north of hayes. We'd like
to put additional no parking
signage on the barricades
themselves so that it's clear
that shouldn't be happening
there and also suggested that
businesses put out specific
wayfinding signage at the
loading zone for their
businesses to support that
visibility. Again mta provides
these barricades and signage to
the sponsor at no cost. And they
have to store it, maintain it,
set it up. But we provide this
to all of our permits. So I want
to acknowledge that the permit
holder, upon receiving the
feedback and the supervisor
office, felt strongly that the
event time should remain the
same. We recognize the event is
loved by many and some things
were not working well and we'd
want to see this succeed. And we
want to really have this be a
reset. So I share this because
there's sort of six after that
time, there was additional
feedback done after the
recommendation was shared with
the stakeholders. Hayes valley
did their own membership survey
and heard from neighbors who
overwhelmingly want to see the
street closure continue. We also
partnered with the office of
small business, who went door to
door on the three, four and 500
block. And I believe spoke to 59
of the 64 merchants. So over 90.
And have a really good idea of
their needs in addition to the
neighbors and while a minority
we heard from don't want it at
all and some wanted the same the
majority 66% wanted a one day or
were neutral about a one day. So
to show that a little bit more
visually see this graph shows
again those door to door small
office, small business surveys
and you can see on the third
bar, that's the group, the ten
responses that we heard that 16%
that wanted to keep friday,
saturday and sunday, most of
them are on the 400 block. Some
of them came from the 400 block.
So it's clear those right on the
block are really are activating
and enjoying that space. We also
heard that a lot of businesses
did not feel comfortable
publicly voicing their concerns.
So we've kept their responses
anonymous as. In conclusion,
this is not about a one day or a
three day closure. This is about
reset ing and rebuilding that
trust in the community and
making a process so it's
possible that the block can work
well and get to 24 over seven.
And it wasn't working for some
merchants. And that's not a
reason to cancel it entirely. We
really want an opportunity to
grow and expand. On the success
in hayes valley and see it
thrive. So with that, that
concludes my presentation and
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Thank you.
Colleagues, do you have
questions before we go to public
comment at DR. Ikuko? Just one.
I have I have feelings about
this, but my clarifying question
to you is there have been some
talk of asking us to do some
kind of study on what it would
take to make this permanent and
what's your thoughts on on doing
that kind of study? Yeah, it's
would be amazing to pedestrian
personally the space I think
that we should leverage upon a
pilot type program that shared
spaces provides so often we go
in with a blank slate go forward
with a pilot and then evaluate
results. We've had three years
to kind of build off of. So I
think that that would be a great
process that I would love to be
part of. And I think to move
that forward, we really need to
kind of have merchants brought
along iron out some of the
issues we have been experiencing
over the last couple of years to
see if it really is a long term
viable solution for all the
merchants in the corridor. And
you said that this is kind of
like it feels a little bit like
a timeout where you're like, go
back to your room and think
about what you've done. Kind of
vibes. How long is this timeout
in your mind? Like how long do
you want to see that the
merchants are able to run this
block before they can? It's a
good question. I mean, we what's
in front of you is a one year
permit and that's consists joint
with the other shared spaces we
brought forward and that's in to
provide stability for the
community. But we very well
could talk about a three month
or a six month period. I don't
know if that means the permits 3
or 6 months or we just commit to
an evaluation time that we are
resourcing, are transparent
about what the metrics we want
to see. I think anything less
than that, I think there's a
there's a lot of work that goes
behind, as you know, to get
these going. I probably wouldn't
suggest less than three months,
but. All right. Thank you. Thank
you. Director henderson. Thank
you, chair. I have a couple
questions. Just I appreciate the
amount of what sounds like a lot
of staff work that went into to
working with the community to
identify a path forward. And I
have a question about the timing
for this. It's a one year
permit. So then what happens?
What should we expect in a
year's time? Um, would it have
to? Would it? Yeah. What should
we expect in a year's time?
Yeah. All sponsors have to
reapply, so they're kind of like
parklets as well. They're sort
of still temporary activations
of the street. So these are, for
all intents and purposes,
temporary permits. So a sponsor
gets permitted for a year, and
after that point they can
reapply. Okay. And then do you
have any in terms of considering
a permanent programing of the
space in this way? Is there a
process or some sort of way that
the community and the staff can
commune, skate during that
during that year to be able to
consider something more
permanent or like I'm just
curious, how do do we have to
wait a year to have that
conversation about expanding it
potentially? No, thank you for
asking so I can provide
clarification. No by all means.
At a minimum, it can be a year,
but we can entertain at any
time. A permit scope can change
and we can bring it back to the
board and permit if we see after
three months, we want to grow or
revoke. It's not has to wait for
a year. But thanks for asking.
Got it. Thank you. Of course.
Thank you, director. So thank
you, monica. Really nice
presentation. I like all the
graphics. It really paints
really clear. Picture for me to
understand what has been going
on and also what are the
proposed traffic cone layout. I
like to what you mentioned about
some some of the incident or
concern from our fire
department. I like to know if
can you enlighten us a little
bit about about what are the
situations that are concerning
for public safety? I mean, I'm
really aware of that whole area.
I live nearby by all that area
and golf street. It's like a
major thoroughfare to, you know,
everyone just racing down that
street and I just want to hear
when you mention some of these
situation options where, when,
when, when folks double park and
congested that intersection and
what are the concerns about when
this street is I just want to
hear historically what we have
learned. What are the concerns?
Of course. Yes. Thank you so 400
block has a is dense with
restaurants and businesses that
get a lot of activity. If
someone is traveling in a
vehicle down southbound golf,
which as you know, is a big
thoroughfare, they get to haze.
They can't turn right because
the block is closed. So
naturally, we're seeing them
just get illegally double parked
at the barricades. So basically
in the middle of the
intersection, not blocking the
lane of traffic per se, but
there's enough space there that
they'll just do the quickest
thing possible. And then they go
out and get to the restaurant or
business on the block and get
back to their car. The
businesses have told us they
don't like that. They they the
setup is detrimental to their
business. And we've heard from
folks like san francisco fire
department, what if there's an
emergency and there's a blocked
car in the way they can't get
there, their truck down. So
hopefully a new barricade set up
and creating additional loading
zone just south of hayes will
and better signage will kind of
alleviate that. But I don't know
if you had specific questions
broader than that specific
activity. Me but that is my
question is any incident or
collectively we had alerts at
our agency to flag this is a
pretty dangerous kind of way to
arrange the street the way we
are. Like if anyone had been
injured by this or I mean, yeah,
no, I'm not aware of an a crash
per se, but we do have the fire
marshal here in the room and I'd
love to invite him up to kind of
respond directly to at least
from their perspective, what
they're seeing for emergency
response time. I don't if that's
pertinent to your question, but
that would be I'd love to have
them come up. Thank you. And
also, I know mary thompson, who
I know has to leave at 330, and
he's here with the office of
small business. She wanted to
speak as well at at some point
when that's relevant and
important. Thank you. Good
afternoon, chair egan. Directors
ken coughlin, your fire marshal.
I want to answer your question.
I see where you're going with
that. Not physical instance, but
the problem is that hay street
and that block is a route for
our battalion chiefs and
sometimes our engines that cross
town. So we have webster,
webster and almost here we have
a firehouse and we have another
one at oak and franklin, and we
have battalion chiefs who run a
section of town. And every time
you have a fire in building
smoke, call, building alarm,
they have to respond one way or
another. And unfortunately, the
their response area is not nice
little blocks. It's kind of it's
interesting. It's been that way
for a long time. Anyway, as we
this closure, which monica
didn't mention, actually has a
20 foot access lane down the
center. Okay. Because there are
still buildings. There are there
are still restaurants there. We
still have to respond, whether
it be a medical or a fire, more
likely a medical call. So the
rearrangement of the cones was
to allow the fire department to
get through there without
actually having a monitor to
move the cones, because we
noticed that was a problem.
Specifically, it would be those
cars that were double parked for
food pickup deliveries that the
chief the engines, the trucks
tried to get through. And all of
a sudden there's a car there and
they just couldn't get through.
So that's the that's more of the
type of incidents we ran into
and that's why we worked
together with sfmta to
reconfigure the cones, to bring
them out. So we don't have that
legal parking at the
intersection and blocking the
crosswalk. So what you said, not
specific, harmed anybody more of
a delay. The harm would be have
to be analyzed afterwards. If
somebody didn't get there on
time. Thank you. I really
appreciate your your expertise
and what is the traffic cone
look like now? What does it look
like now? Yes the way the cones
are, they will they type to
barricade? Is that the type
three barricades at the end?
That's what the larger ones with
the slats. And then they have
just simple cones in there. What
we've asked and worked with is
to still use the type three
barricades. But space the cones
a little bit larger so we can
still get through without
running them over. If you run
them over the wrong way, then
they get stuck on the wheel well
. Now you got more of a bigger
problem. You're going to ruin a
million dollar fire engine. So
the thing is, the idea is to
have quick access directly
through the lane without and
then also some cooperation with
the operator side of the
merchants. Right. Well the
permit says you cannot put
anything permanent in that
space. We're not worried about
people walking in the street.
They tend to move out of the way
when you have a big red fire
engine making lots of noise and
coming down at you. So that's
not the problem. It's the it's
keeping the physical items out
of the street tables and
barricades and things like that.
I believe the permit actually
even calls for cones to mark
down the street to say this is
how far you can come out, you
know, put tables and chairs in
the parking place and even a
little bit wider. But leave this
area clear. So you MAY have
heard of instances where we've
driven down the street. That's
what it's for. We are we do use
it as a response route. We have
used it to get from one side of
town to the other. As you know,
oak street fell street. They've
gotten quite busier over the
years as some type of
reconfiguration. So hayes is an
important cross town pathway for
us. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Thank
you. Colleagues, I'd like to ask
marianne thompson from office of
small business to address the
board so she has to leave at
330. Thank you. Board members.
Thank you, monica. Thank you. So
in the last few months, the
office of small business has
engaged very strongly with
sfmta. It's important for us
that the voice of small
businesses be heard, and this
has really been a great process
in many ways. What sfmta did was
they enabled us to bring many
voices to the table. Those who
were unheard, unseen in
merchants association actions
that sfmta did not know existed.
I want to applaud sfmta and the
mayor's office for bringing
everyone together in a really,
really safe space and having
these great conversations. For
those of you who don't know me
and my work, I have actually
been with the office of economic
and workforce development for
over ten years. Open space
activations is at the heart and
soul of what I do every day.
Besides engaging small
businesses, many of you have
been to a lot of my activate
sessions and didn't even know it
. Hayes valley. That's when your
work is good. Hayes valley is at
the heart of this is deep to me
because when I go to hayes
valley and when I get there, by
the way, I am a muni person. I
don't have a car. So when I'm
there and I see that space, I
want to see it activated. And I
want to see it be brilliant and
I want it to be the shining star
of the city. We have work to do
to get it there. And I think
it's really, really important
that we say that out loud. We
have work to do to get it to be
a shining star. And I and I
really, again, want to thank
monica and her team for
listening to people. I also want
to point something out because
I've been here since 1:00 and a
lot of small businesses have
been here since 1:00. And this
is something for all of us to
think about. The business that
are here are sole proprietors.
Some of them MAY have had to
close their doors to come here
today, having people go through
public comment for an item that
impacts small businesses. Let's
rethink how we do this and let's
really rethink how we treat our
small businesses. And again, I
really want to emphasize this
because it did come up in our
survey. People were afraid to
come forward and speak about
this closure because they felt
at times they would be bullied
or treated unfairly. And so I
want to make sure at the
conclusion of this, the voices
from the small businesses that
you hear today, they can walk
away feeling safe and heard. And
that's all we ask for. That's
it. Thank you. Thank you.
Director henzi, I believe you
had your hand up. I did this
sort of. This is a question for
monica, but it sort of builds on
what MISS Thompson just touched
on. Do we have typically, um,
evaluate evaluation metrics and
sort of reporting requirements
for storm surge spaces, street
closures. Um, and if we don't,
um, have you thought of
evaluation, evaluation metrics
possibly for this one, like the
number of activations they have,
the number of, I don't know,
people that you use it on
comparing on what days,
etcetera, and the such. Um so
could you touch on evaluation of
the closure as we consider this,
as we before public comment. Yes
thank you. Director henzi have
thought about it. I think is a
wonderful idea in the effort of
transparency and decision making
. It is not easy to develop
metrics for something like this.
How do you it's such like a
soulful art and sense of being
sort of can you establish a
number? Is the number of people
a certain amount then that is a
success? Is it the quality of
the event and the activation?
And so I don't say that as an
excuse. I think it is definitely
something I would like to
explore. We have a lot of
evaluation programs here at the
sfmta and people that think a
lot about this and I would love
to consult them and people that
work with small businesses so
that we can establish that. But
it is we would want to do it
thoughtfully so that we are
right. It is measurable. Yeah,
it is a hard it is a hard thing
to measure, but yeah. Okay thank
you. Manager. That was it. Okay.
Thank you. Director henzi
colleagues, I'd like to open it
to public comment. Unless
there's anything else pressing
right now. Okay. Please.
Speakers in the room on the
hayes street. Shared spaces. I
do have some speaker cards.
Andrew andrew singer. Jennifer
laszlo barnett. Trzcinski stacy
randecker. Afternoon board.
Barnett brzezinski. District two
frequent visitor of hayes valley
. If I could recap a little bit
of the presentation we just saw
the closure and the area there
in hayes valley on hayes street
is so popular for people double
parked to try to get into the
area even more than they already
can with with legal parking. So
if there is a moment of peace
and quiet on the street, aka it
hasn't been activated, that's a
permit violation because drivers
are behaving badly and violating
the barricade. We're going to
remove the barricade and let
them in more. As an example of
what's going on around the city.
And these are all incidents that
happened in the last week and a
half. A car drove off the road
and onto a building at filbert
and fillmore, causing a gas leak
in building damage and making
the fire department respond. A
driver committed a hit and run
in the bayview, hitting a car
which then hit a muni vehicle,
which I'm sure a lot of you are
aware of. A car recently veered
off the road on divisadero and
smashed into a bus shelter
between page and haight, a store
in union square was ramrodded
so-called by burglars who drive
a car into the building in order
to then steal from it. And there
was a 100 mile an hour chase
coming up the peninsula that
ended right at the freeway exit
where hayes valley begins. This
is the type of thing that we are
inviting onto our streets as a
default when any other more
higher purpose, pedestrian
friendly closure, more business
activity, more just neighbors
getting to know their neighbors.
This is considered the
aberration. You have to apply
for a permit for this. I
strongly encourage you to
please, please, please consider
sending this back to the mta in
encouraging them that any
increase in vehicle lane mile
access is a contravention of
transit first policy and the
climate goals the mta has and
also ask a question why are we
the only city going backwards on
this nearly every city in the
bay area and even around the
world in the country is
expanding pedestrian access be
street in san mateo, castro
street in mountain view. One of
the speakers earlier mentioned
san jose. So we need to do more
of this within san francisco.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Next speaker. Hi I'm jennifer
laska, the PRESIDENT Of the
hayes valley neighborhood
association. And I pulled the
original permit three years ago
and have been worked working
tirelessly with the merchants on
this as you've heard over and
over again, this closure is very
beloved by the community. The
immediate community. And I hear
from people who say that they
come from all over the city to
come, come and enjoy this space
on the weekends. So that brings
more business to our our small
businesses in hayes valley. I
want to note that the merchants
actually applied for a three day
closure. What you're seeing in
front of you is a one day
closure that was recommended by
sfmta staff. That is not what we
applied for. We still have not
heard a good reason why a three
day closure can't continue.
We've heard issues about the
barricades. There's a solution
for that. That's something that
we totally agree with should be
done. And we've also heard
difficult days about rerouting
the bus for three days a week.
But no one's been able to
explain to me why that really is
a difficulty. And we've seen it
done successfully for over a
year now. So I really need to
understand why that would be a
barrier to continue ing this
three day closure. I guess we
have now heard the concerns of
the fire department, but it
sounds like the barricade
reconfiguration will help with
those. And I think the
additional signage will also
improve some of the traffic
issues. We'd love to work on
this as a permanent solution
because there is an easy way to
have two lanes heading westbound
on hayes turn left onto gough
and really improve that traffic
flow full time. So in summary, I
really urge approving the three
day closure not just the one day
closure that's in front of you
today. Thank you. Thank you.
Next speaker, please. Hi, my
name is andrew signer. I've been
living in the city for 20 years.
I've been in hayes valley for
seven at the beginning of the
pandemic, a large group of
volunteers, myself included,
spent every friday and saturday
and sunday stationed at
intersections along the merchant
corridor to get the shared
spaces program off the ground.
Three years later, I believe
it's been a shining example of
what's enabled our neighborhood
not only to survive the
pandemic, but but thrive. And
that includes probably our
busiest time friday night all
the way through sunday.
recently, the program has been
the future has been a little bit
uncertain that was definitely a
wake up call for myself and a
lot of folks in the
neighborhood. And I created a
website free hayes.Org along
with the petition asking not
only to continue the three day
program but to find a way to get
to a permanent pedestrianized
hayes street. Since SEPTEMBER,
1200 people have signed it.
There's enormous enthusiasm
around this in our community. I
also think there's a lot of
capacity to help the sponsor
make this a successful program.
So with that in mind, I have two
requests for you all. One,
please amend the agenda item to
allow us to continue this three
day program that we've had for
three years. And two, please
instruct mta staff to design a
process to a what it looks like
to get to a fully pedestrianized
street. And finally, I just want
to thank you for all your work,
particularly mta staff and folks
in the mayor's office and folks
in our supervisor's office.
There's tons of work going into
this, so thank you so much.
Thank you. Next speaker, please.
Good afternoon. My name is
stephen breach and I urge you to
not I urge you to not reduce the
hayes valley shared spaces
program from three days a week
to just nine hours on saturdays.
Furthermore I urge you to direct
staff to help the hayes valley
merchant council accommodate the
owners requirements that are
being placed on them by the fire
department and the sfmta staff
excuse me, to renew their permit
and maintain the program. Hayes
valley shared spaces program has
been an economic lifeline for
merchants on hayes for the past
three years and has helped
revitalize the entire
neighborhood by expanding
patricia's green and connecting
it to the local businesses on
hayes street. Once again, the
fire department is fighting the
shared spaces program on the
grounds that closing the street
to vehicles with traffic cones
impedes their emergency response
times. While I analyze six years
of vehicle crashes on hayes
street and the fire department's
response times to 355 emergency
calls that have been there over
the past six years. And I found
this at least four of the
vehicle crashes on hayes street
on the 3405 hundred blocks could
have been prevented if the
program was not scaled back in
2021. An and if it actually had
been extended to 2018 when we
should have actually started
doing this earlier. Furthermore,
the shared spaces program has
not had an impact on emergency
response times by station 36,
which is three blocks away, and
which services all 911 calls to
the area. The two minutes is not
enough time to go into the
specifics, but you should have
received a deluge of emails
yesterday that link to my data
analysis, which hopefully you've
had a chance to review and I'm
happy to follow up with any
answers or any questions you MAY
have. So the takeaway here is
that the hayes valley shared
spaces program expands a
critical, pro-business, safe,
open space simply by restricting
unnecessary cut-through traffic
and does not have a negative
impact on the on the fire
department's emergency response
times. Furthermore reducing the
program from three days to one
flies in the face of our city's
climate action plan, or vision
zero. And our transit first
goals. Please do not reduce the
footprint of this program and
direct staff to help the hayes
valley merchant council
administer and expand it. Thank
you. Thank you for your
comments. Next speaker, please.
Hi, maggie. Crystal I own a
hayes street facing business.
I'm also a resident in hayes
valley, which means that I can
actually walk to work. I've been
reflecting this last week on the
terrible events that we've
probably all been reflecting on,
and it's a bit ironic that we're
squabbling over a one block
patch of asphalt. I'm
supporting. I'm one of the 66%
that supports the modifications
proposed by sfmta, and I'm super
hopeful that this reset any
reset will reframe the
conversation and allow for an
opportunity for all of us to
participate in a really dynamic
and wonderful, active version of
400. Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Hi, stacy
randecker. This all feels oddly
familiar to the active
communities program, the one
where we are spending a year to
go out and ask people how they
feel or the valencia pilot where
we're doing this weird thing and
checking it out to see how
things go for a year. When are
we going to have the thing that
is like bold and like is where
we should be going? We're asking
people like, we're going to
scale back this thing that's
awesome and we're going to and
we have to like, you know,
activate it and do all this
stuff and barriers up and
barriers down. And it is too
much. How about 24 over seven
pedestrian ization of three
blocks? That's your pilot.
That's the thing. That's what we
all pour our efforts into. So
all the energy that's going
into, well, what do you think
and how would this work? And
blah, blah, blah. No actually do
it. Go there and see what does
the fire department need when we
set it up this way, what do the
merchants need to get access,
etcetera? What do the residents
feel and it shouldn't have to be
this special, like, oh, we've
got to jazz it up and whatever.
It's just like the bike to roll
work or school day for
everybody. It's like it
shouldn't be a special event. It
should be every day that there
are places you can go that is
quiet or that you can get a bite
to eat. You can gather with your
friends. There's extra space
there is these islands should be
throughout the city. We should
make it so that everybody can
get everywhere they need to go
without relying on a car or more
of this. Please expand this.
Don't contract it. Expand this
and multiply it. Let's go after
I want clement and 24th street
to thanks. Thank you for your
comment. Next speaker, please.
Good afternoon, director tomlin
and board. I'm lloyd silverstein
. I'm the founder of the hayes
valley merchants council and we
currently hold the permit for
the shared streets program. I
also want to mention I'm a third
generation owner of the oldest
optical store in san francisco,
which got its start just a few
blocks from here in 1907. I hope
you'll indulge me if I go over
my two minutes, but there's been
a lot going on here and I really
want to be able to address
everything. Hayes valley was hit
especially hard by the pandemic.
Within six months, one out of
every three businesses had
closed for no other commercial
corridor in the city was hit
this hard. Yet we've come back
faster and stronger than any of
them. We are fully leased. Take
a look at chestnut union
fillmore. You'll see dozens of
for lease signs. The reason that
hayes valley is thriving is
simple. For much of the
pandemic. I and others that
you've heard from today spent
our weekends touring hayes
valley with brokers and
potential new tenants. What they
saw here and what they saw.
Nowhere else was activity.
People out in the streets, in
our public spaces, in other
words, customers for our small
businesses. This is just part of
the value of shared streets. Our
merchants council is democratic
by nature. We advocate for the
greater good of all merchants.
We also espouse that our
neighbors successes and
important as our own and the
speaking with one loud voice
that represents the majority of
our businesses is in the best
interests of our community. In
the case of shared streets, that
voice is loud and clear. Keep
our existing shared streets
program. This is not anecdotal.
This is based on our unbiased
online survey sent to 175
businesses in our community. It
was completely transparent and
available for all respondents to
view. I will say for a moment
here that the one mta conducted
was biased. It only asked, are
you in favor of a saturday? Only
it didn't say. Are you in favor
of friday? Only sunday, only all
days. So it was very biased and
obviously the results were
biased to even though we were
told by mta that our survey was
not necessary, we felt that it
was a way to get accurate census
on the issue. Our survey was
reviewed by mta and the staff
before sending in all data, both
raw and summarized, was sent
back to them. The survey showed
overwhelming support for the
existing schedule and some
people wanted to extend it. When
our shared streets renewal came
before the escort in MARCH, we
were surprised to hear that
there were concerns from sfpd
mta, as well as stakeholders
outside the sheriff's. Thank you
for your comments. That is your
time and we have to be equitable
with all speakers. Thank you for
being here. Next speaker, please
can I put this in the record for
anybody to see? Sure. Next
speaker please go ahead and
approach the podium. Hi. Hi.
This is my first time. Mike
gallagher I'm not going to speak
as eloquently as everyone else,
but I'd like it to remain the
same as it was and hopefully
close for good. You don't need
to activate a park. We can look
at a bunch of cities around the
world that are way ahead of us
and I guess we always talk about
wanting to be a world class
city, but it only takes trips
elsewhere to see that it looks
like we're living 30 years in
the past and people need to have
more space outside to hang out
and this is just it's clear that
somebody wants this close
because as it was tried to be
done behind closed doors, pretty
sure we know who that is. The
mayor doesn't seem to like this
stuff. And it's time that we do
bold things and not just mess
around and make the merchants do
all this stuff. Just let just
you know, do your job. Like
build this stuff out like they
do in dutch cities. I mean, this
is a it's a joke. I've been here
for over ten years and nothing
changes. And it's just do
something bold. We saw in the
pandemic what this city could be
. I mean, when it was so quiet,
when there was just so much less
and we got all these great
programs and now every single
time I look, it's getting scaled
back and scaled back and scaled
back. We're not growing
anything. We're just scaling,
scaling, scaling the slow
streets, little chips here like
you can have through traffic.
All this little, little things
just chip away at it, chip away
at it so that it doesn't work so
that it can be stopped. It's
pretty clear that that's what
people want to happen. That's
all I have to say. Okay. Thanks
for your comments. Next speaker,
please. I apologize. It couldn't
be here at one because I was on
a surgery table. It's very
interesting to hear everything
today. I I've owned a business
on hayes street for 20 years.
I've lived on grove street for
15 years. I am the perfect
person to represent the fact
that all of these huge successes
that they're talking about
aren't successes in any way,
shape or form. The information
they're based off, including
lloyd's survey, biased,
manipulative in the tremendous
victories that you guys are
saying are nonexistent as far as
I can see by pure stakeholder,
as the people who've done the
work, the heavy lifting on hayes
street for the past several
decades, I want to just say I'm
sitting in here. I just realized
the politicization of everything
and there's a necessary evil
called politics. And I see you
guys working. I have a business
on hayes street, not street, not
a hayes shared street. My
business is on a street where
81% of my customers drive their
car to that street. It's gotten
incredibly difficult. I
understand. I can look at what
the city has done to abide by
the rules of the biking
community. The manipulations
that's going on. I get it. I'd
like to be a progressive city,
too, but we're also a city
that's founded on streets that
the fire trucks have to go down
on. And all of the successes
that I've been hearing about
today, I'm going to tell you,
please, they aren't as great as
you guys think they are. And if
my business for 81% of the
people I'm sorry, I'm going to
leave with this with you guys,
70% of the people who come to my
store visit other stores in
hayes valley. The congestion in
on laguna and octavio for the
byproducts of all these things,
a nightmare. I have traffic jams
where I've never had traffic
jams before. I have people
honking their cars at all times
when it never existed. So I
don't even want the word I hate
the word activation right now. I
apologize. Maybe I'm old school.
No activation. I'm not with
maggie. I don't agree with the
one day. Thank you. That's your
time. Thank you very much. Does
anybody want this like lloyd? I
can leave that for you guys.
This is a 140 customers who are
real people. I'll go ahead and
leave it. That's fine. Next
speaker, please. Hi. Good
afternoon, directors. Zach
lipton, first, I'll just say I'm
sad to hear the news from
director uchitelle. Thanks for
all your work here and I know
this is far from the end of your
efforts to help build the
thriving and more livable city.
One of those efforts is, of
course, the side street shared
space. And I'm disappointed with
this proposal to reduce the
successful and popular shared
space program. I hope we can
continue the friday through
sunday shared spaces or at least
just continue this item for a
bit while these issues continue
to be worked out. But I don't
just want to focus on the number
of days I hope the agency can
work more to support the
merchants in the neighborhood to
make the shared space a success
and work towards a future
permanent, 24/7. Hayes plaza.
I'm honestly confused why we're
framing this as a compliance
with permit terms issue and not
a what do we need to do to help
make hayes street the best place
it can be? One hayes street has
been a sewer of double parking
for decades, so why only now are
we punishing merchants by
curtailing the shared space?
Because we suddenly expect them
to be responsible for parking
enforcement? Why do we keep
creating impediments instead of
building on really one of the
most popular successes of the
last few years? When is the last
time you've ever sat in this
room and heard a near unanimous
parade of merchants praising an
mta program anywhere in the city
? This this program has
near-unanimous support from
merchants on the 400 block of
hayes that are directly affected
. And it's one of our city's
most walkable and transit rich
commercial areas. And for those
who need to drive, there's a 600
space mta owned parking garage
around the corner for everyone.
Obviously, as you've heard, the
shared space is not perfect, but
instead of retreating, which
will do nothing to address those
concerns, we can work harder to
make the shared space work
better and live up to the values
that we talk so much about.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Hi. Board
members. Luke bornheimer here. I
urge you to amend the item today
to keep the three day closure
intact. It's wildly successful.
It should continue. I also urge
you to direct staff to work
towards a 24 over seven
pedestrian ization of this block
of hayes street because it's so
successful. Many of the concerns
about the closure have to do
with barricades being moved and
put back and where they go.
There's a great solution for
that. We've done it on a car
free jfk. You make it 24 over
seven and then you can install
barriers that just stay there
and you can actually engineer
them, work with the fire
department to make them work
great. You can also install
furniture, street furniture in
the street and activate the
street on car free jfk. We don't
have concerts every day. We have
some furniture out there and
it's activated by just people
coming. We don't need to throw
parties on every single car free
street in the city, every single
day at every single hour. You
can install furniture tables
shade just allow people to come
to the space. So I urge you to
amend this to make it a three
day closure. But I urge you to
go further and direct staff to
work towards making it a 24 over
seven, pile it, whatever we want
to call it. We should be working
towards that as a city. We know
the crises we face. We know what
our policies, our goals say. We
know what we talk about in press
releases or press conferences is
we can actually act to fulfill
some of those things that we
talk about doing right here.
This is a very tangible way to
do it. Thank you. Thank you.
Good afternoon. My name is pete
wilson and I am a resident of
district five western addition
and something somebody said
earlier today about other
countries really made me think
because as somebody who lived in
italy, 20 or 30 years ago and
rode my bicycle and was hit
several times on the city
streets and then went back a
year ago and was just amazed at
the little lanes that they have
and how what a great job they've
done. And how much fun it is
visiting places over there where
you do have city sidewalk
streets, not pedestrian streets.
And so I definitely would
support that every day. And i
like the people who are saying
24 over seven, seven days a
week. I would also like to see
as a somebody who is certified
as a trolley bus operator, I
would love to see the 21 hayes
trolley bus going downtown,
actually going somewhere and
providing for not only the
tourists. I used to work in the
tourism industry, but for the
residents and to bring more
people to hayes valley because
it goes as far as hyde. We'd
like to see it go all the way
downtown and to say that we need
diesel busses or electric busses
to come in on the weekend is not
true. Right now, the 31 balboa
is going off wires. It could go
all the way to caltrans on
wires. It drives under the wires
for 1.1 miles, and they're
electrified wires and they're
choosing not to use them. And
trolley busses use 30% less
power than a than battery
busses. Let's remember the
mining of the lithium and all
that other stuff, folks. So
let's bring back the trolley
bus. We can use it seven days a
week and there's operators who
love driving those. And thank
you for your time. Thank you for
sharing your perspective with
any other speakers in the room.
Seeing none. Please open the
remote comment at this time.
We'll move to remote public
comment not to exceed a total
time of ten minutes. Members of
the public wishing to comment
should dial star three to enter
the queue each speaker will have
two minutes. Moderator for
speaker, good afternoon, this is
barry taranto. I was surprised
as well to see that you cut down
the proposal from 3 to 1 day. I
think hayes valley does need the
help by having the street
closure for the business, but
there has to be some mitigation
measures to alleviate some of
the issues that are created by
the by that block closure.
Excuse me. Um, first, you need
to have enough vacant space for
our taxis and delivery cars to
pull over and not block the
intersection or not block the
not double parked on golf street
. You also need to also have
some space on golf east of the
intersection, not golf city.
Hayes so because what happens is
that light that that left turn
arrow is not long enough and so
you have cars stacked up at that
left turn and you have cars
double parked in the right lane.
So what do you do? You so
there's a problem there. So I
think it's important to actually
put up permanent signage saying
on this day during certain hours
it's a towaway zone. So
therefore, when someone gets
their car towed because it's a
white zone during that time
period, then they're not
surprised. And I think it's
important to enforce it.
Unfortunately, you don't have
pco's at night enforcing the no
parking zones. So this is
something you have to rectify
and maybe make that arrow a
little bit longer. So that so
therefore, the cars don't stack
up to that left lane and so I
think it's important to MAY even
add another day to this. And the
last thing is that the grove
street exit from the performing
arts garage also creates a
problem when the symphony or
another event breaks before your
10:00. Like a lot of the time,
it ends at 930. Thank you. So
that's another time is up next.
Speaker.
Conservatoire minor. One concern
I have is what access to close
streets will the aged and
disabled have now these are long
these can be long blocks and
physically impaired would have a
difficult time patronizing
business. So you really have to
think it over as far as
patronage goes aged and disabled
. Also byproducts services on
this on this street and you're
actually shutting down your
revenue and I'm concerned about
that. Basically about access for
everyone in the city. And you
cannot favor one population over
another. It should be open for
business for everyone. And
what's going to happen during
the winter? Oh, it's going to be
great to be in the open air
during the summer. What about
the winter when it gets cold? So
basically businesses might be
freezing themselves out of
revenue. And I think everyone
loses in the process. So I think
this over very carefully and
make accommodations for everyone
and be flexible to adapt to all,
challenge changes. Thank you.
Thank you. Next speaker. Good
afternoon. This is mitch records
with the hayes valley small
business association and hayes
valley safe. We want to
underscore that throughout the
entirety of the street closure
on hayes. We've been advocating
for a fair and equitable process
. Our concern has always been
that that process for a program
that was rolled out as a
temporary during a pandemic was
never clearly defined. Now that
we've been part of the process,
we support the recommendations
set forth for this pilot by
sfmta. We also hope that you
will not be dissuaded by others
who have been trying to change
the narrative for an initiative
that has impacted small business
operators and residents not
always favorably, who have
spoken up over the last couple
of years with respect to their
concerns evolving around
scheduling traffic issues,
signage and lack of activation.
The current permit conditions at
face value seemingly try to
address these. So let's try it
and reassess. I also want to
express concern about the
inability of small business
operators to speak up and share
their stance when it has become
evident that there is another
agenda being driven here which
has hindered the much needed
conversations about how to
improve the vision of transit.
First, in hayes valley, we would
like to see the same synergy
applied to optimizing the many
open spaces in hayes valley and
the western addition to try to
really capitalize on the big
vision we once had with the
removal of the freeway. As it
stands now, we have serious
traffic issues. We have serious
public safety issues, all of
which we've been advocating for
the last few years. All the
focus has been on this one.
Block thank you. Thank you. No
additional callers. Okay
colleagues, the item is before
you are there, comments,
questions. Director kahina,
please. Thank you, chair, and
thank you to everyone, all the
members of the public and the
business community that came out
to give public comment on this
item. Um colleagues, I do see
this this particular proposal as
a way to formalize a pandemic
era program. And that alone has
tons of growing pains to it,
right? Like we're trying to
figure out how something where
the economy was shut down, all
activities were shut down, was
quite successful for a lot of
folks. A lifeline for a lot of
folks. And how we can bring that
back and formalize it with our
new activities with all our
different systems up and
running. So I know this is going
to feel painful for a lot of
folks for some time as we figure
out how to make this work. Now
with everything active again,
um, I do see the proposal before
us laying the foundation for
something bold. I don't see it
closing the door to that and it
gives us about a year to regroup
and really understand how to
rightsize a solution here. I'm
really grateful that staff
worked with the office of small
business. I think that was a
very smart move, but also a very
intentional move that I think we
need to do more of in future
projects as we work in
commercial corridors. I've
worked with mary anne thompson
before when I did my work at the
excelsior action group, and so I
understand and a lot of the work
that she does and the integrity
with which she does that work.
And so I was really grateful to
see that she was part of this
project and that she was part of
the surveying process and truly
want to thank monica for all the
work that you've done to
shepherd this this project. I
did have a few clarifying
questions, though, on the
proposal itself. Um, you
mentioned that that during the
three day closure we rerouted
the 21 right? I wanted to just
get your sense, if there are any
material changes in ridership
during that time, if the closure
affected ridership on the 21 and
if in this proposal were
mitigating some of those
challenges. So a great question.
Director unfortunately, I don't
know. I don't have that
information readily available,
but can easily pull that the
metrics and what I heard mostly
from the working closely with
the transit team were around
reported passenger confusion
about where to find those bus on
those three days because for
example friday is 4 to 10 part
of the day part not and also the
operator some of the operator
complaints and confusion about
where they need to be when. But
the ridership number I don't
have. And so I think as we're
evaluating this permit, that
would be something I'd
definitely be interested in
understand more. I anticipate
we're going to see this item
again in a year's time. So it
would be lovely to have that
type of information available.
Um, additionally, getting the
operators perspective to I think
that would be wonderful to also
have to understand, you know, is
it has it been easy to navigate
any changes there? And as it
pertains to the barricades, you
know, I've thrown a few
festivals myself. I've thrown a
few events myself and I've gone
through the process and it's
quite intensive. And you have
all these folks there from all
these different departments
weighing in on on a street
closure for one day. And so I
imagine we had that sort of
level of inspection for this
particular for closure in this
permit process. And I'm so great
that fire was part of this and
they were part of the equation
here. Who was responsible for
setting up the barricades? I
understand we're purchasing the
barricades and we're setting
that up, which is quite generous
because it's got permit holders
have to pay that fee themselves
and they have to pay fees for
all the signage and all that
stuff. So it seems like we're
we're doing our good faith
effort and supporting this by
also doing that. But who is
responsible for setting up those
barricades? The sponsor for?
Yeah, thank you for asking that.
To clarify for every shared
space street closure it is the
sponsor the permittees
responsible city to store and
set up and take down so store
the barricades throughout the
year they get one set of
barricades and put them out so
we make sure our job, in
addition to providing the
barricades, is to educate them.
We hornbostel our amazing
engineer is here. He works on
all these renderings and does
this assessment for us. He'll
draw up the barricade schema,
get on the phone with sponsors,
talk about them, talk about the
spacing, why we need them. We've
often gone out in person and
marked up maybe the crosswalk
for them, but ultimately they
have to set it up every day and
take it down every day and. If
this was an issue with a three
day closure, just wanted to get
a sense from from the team on
what we're going to do to ensure
that this is being set up in a
compliant way and how we're
working with the permit holder
to ensure that they're compliant
with that piece. Yeah. Um I
think like I mentioned, the
education the most we could do
up front. So there's, there's
this technical information so
that they understand it. So
there's no discrepancy from the
get go. But ultimately, yeah, we
don't have bandwidth. We are not
going out every week. We are
surveying, we are out on the
ground all the time. I've gone
out there, jared has gone out
there. The fire marshal and
we'll take photos and we can
like share that back with them.
Sort of like, hey, this is the
tweak needed. And we don't have
an official enforcement team at
the mta to do that. It kind of
has been on our own time, but I
think that's something else I
can think of is sort of as
they're rolling it out to be
kind of monitoring and
reporting, but ultimately,
again, it is a lot of the
responsibility that these
sponsors are taking on when
they're applying for a permit.
And so if in the event the
permit holder does not comply
with that, what do we do then?
Or how do we learn about it and
what do we do then? Yeah, this
is new territory for shared
spaces because they are
recurring. My understanding for
escort is special event when
there are compliance issues,
it's more reflected on when a
sponsor comes back the next
year. Kind of like maybe are we
permitting them again? So we've
developed revocation thresholds
and we can and we will iron that
out more for transparency and
working with the sponsors. We
haven't had to use that yet, but
having a documentation of, ah,
you not closing the street when
you said you could, that's one
problem, like having I'm
permitted for fridays, but some
fridays I'm not and some fridays
I am. So having that sort of
when we will on what grounds and
how we would communicate at
first communicate verbally and
then you're on. You can be
revoked. We have the ability as
mta to revoke a permit. So we
want to make sure that that is
kind of that process is
documented so we can do that.
It's just a matter of how and we
haven't had to do that yet, but
we're still sort of new and
rolling out the shared spaces
program. We weren't doing much
of that type of enforcement
during the pandemic as we were
more lenient. Yeah, I would
definitely say like as we as we
start formalizing this process
more, I think it would be
helpful for us to understand
what what sort of compliance
measures we have and what sort
of enforcement measures we have.
So that we could support more
projects like this and make sure
folks are given the proper
guidance and the tools to
succeed and see these succeed.
Right so that's the hope. And
lastly, this is more for jeff,
but I did want to acknowledge a
letter that we received from
supervisor preston's office and
hoping that you could address
some of the recommendations that
were in that. And I'll point
them out. So one of them, I
think, was was already addressed
by by members of the public. But
also with your presentation,
monica, of why a restoration of
three day weekend closure to
private vehicles. It would be
challenging at this point. So I
think you've addressed that
pretty well. But understanding
the time sensitive of this
proposal, there was a request to
entertain an idea of continuing
the item until DECEMBER to give
the community an opportunity to
address outstanding issues. And
so I just want to get a context
of is there a time sensitivity
in deciding this now, now and
have we do we think within a
month's time we would make any
material changes to the project
at with more outreach and more
engagement with folks? So. Well,
first of all, the timing issue
is just that the previous permit
has long since expired. And we
need to formalize the permit for
a whole variety of reasons,
including liability. What is
clear from all the engagement
that we've done is there's near
universal agreement on the
desired outcome. The only
question is how do we best get
there? The staff recommendation
is very clear that the best way
to achieve success, to achieve
the desired outcome of a
vibrant, car free, active street
is to temporarily shrink the
number of days we work with the
community in order to figure out
how to one, comply with the
rules of the permit to figure
out activation and three
continue engaging with community
and getting support from
merchants and then expand from
there. Once we're able to
achieve success. So that's that
is our primary reason in terms
of the desired outcome. Um,
staff and supervisor preston's
office are in agreement and I
think generally what we've heard
from the community is, is mostly
agreement about the goal that
we're trying to get to where
there's disagreement is on how
to get to the goal and delaying
this item simply delays our
ability to work with the
community to get to the goal.
We've we've heard loud and clear
the various voices. Thank you,
jeff. Colleagues, are there
other questions? Okay, director
henzi, I see you. Go ahead. Um,
director kikina actually,
actually only asked my
questions. I was curious if
these permits were revocable and
how we were measuring compliance
with the, the, the, the, the to
configure them weighing out
configurations. I did want to
and this is mostly for my
colleagues I did want to and I
think maybe director uchitel has
a proposal that he might want to
propose as a compromise. I did
want to say I know director kino
was mentioning a year, but I
didn't want to maybe consider
one, maybe director you could
deal gives his proposal well,
maybe that we shorten the permit
, permit duration and add some
evaluation metrics. But I'll let
director uchitel maybe toss out
his proposal and then I'll add
to see what he might have. Yeah
okay. Director uchitel, please.
I feel like what is the sports
metaphor? A year? What did you
give me an alley oop? Okay um,
clearly not my strong suit. It's
that thing where you pass the
ball and then the person puts it
in the. The basket. I'm going to
keep my comments. Just the hayes
valley and the hayes valley.
Shared space. Yes, I have spoken
to a lot of merchants on this
corridor and it's a corridor I'm
very familiar with. And I know
that this has been really tough.
Monica, also alex sweetened the
mayor's office. Marianne I think
my greatest disappointment with
this is that it got to this
point where it's become so
divisive and I know a thing or
two about this, this getting
divisive and it's the hardest
thing too, because like the
small business is ecosystem of
owners. Like we're all working
so hard to keep our businesses
open. And for and honestly, the
pandemic was a moment where that
really brought us a lot of us
together to kind of support each
other. And love each other and
survive and I've seen in the
post pandemic period as as we
try to continue to survive that
unity and that that kind of
togetherness really starting to
splinter, it makes me sad from a
very tactical perspective. I
think there should be a
compromise from just reading
through the survey results that
we gathered. It seems like a
fair bit of merchants on the
block like it and merchants on
the either other block don't
like it so much. Not so
surprising when we've asked them
to go from it sounds like about
30 hours to something like 9 or
10 hours. I'll tell you what, my
suggestion is, colleagues, that
we can talk about, but I'll just
take a step back and say one of
the fatal flaws I think about
this on hay street is, is how
temporary it actually feels. And
we're basically asking
communities to reorient
themselves around a street in
different ways on a weekly
basis. So a couple of days a
week you can drive through a
couple days a week, you can't.
And it actually is really hard
to build community in a space
that's quite so temporary. So I
think I understand why other
merchants and folks who are
getting out of the symphony and
people in around are annoyed and
frustrated and confused. And
part of it is because, as you
know, our streets are also
community spaces. And when we
don't have any reliable city of
what they're going to look and
feel like, it creates a lot of
frustration. An and so I get
that. So I do think that if
we're going to start if we're
going to be closing streets and
opening them up for businesses
and other uses, we need to
choose some streets. We do need
to make them permanent. We need
to actually sfmta and the city
needs to invest in them and make
them awesome or else they're
just going to be like cones in
the street and merchants trying
to book deejays and making it
cool, which honestly is not
really what we're good at. So I
do think we need to pick a lane
pun intended and we need to try
to show how we can make a couple
of these spaces really special.
Well, and putting cones up a
couple times a week is not going
to cut it. So I think we should
meet in the middle for my
understanding, they had a friday
night closure an all day
saturday, and all day sunday. I
know it's inconven decent for
our busses, but I think we
should bring back friday night,
which is like five hours. That's
15 hours. They used to have 30.
To me, it seems like a fair
compromise to kind of meet them
in the middle. I also think that
we should study what would it
would take, how much money it
would take, how much time it
would take and how our agency
could take this one block back
street and make it something
different than what it is now,
and work with the fire
department to think about a
solution that feels good with
everyone. So I think we should
put our money where our mouth is
. Study what it would be like to
make one block of hay street
into a permanent pedestrianized
space. And I think we should add
back friday night and take away
sunday night in terms of the
timing of the permit for this, I
think it's a very I can imagine
for hayes valley, for any
merchants association, it's a
lot to go through the approval
process for this. So I wouldn't
actually advocate for reducing
the time of the permit. But I do
think and I'm sure, monica,
you'll be in communication with
them where the kind of checking
in on how things are going. We
shouldn't wait a year to do
that, right? We should be
checking in with them more
regularly and trying to be a
partner to them. In terms of how
it's actually going and how we
can be helpful. So that's my
proposal. It seems fair, kind of
meet them in the middle. I've
heard that friday night was very
good for them from a small
business perspective. As we
know, friday nights is a
different vibe than weekend
days. It brings out different
kinds of folks and there's a lot
of restaurants in and around
this block. I'll second that. I
I was going to suggest six
months, but directory you could
tell obviously has much, much
more background on what it takes
to secure one of these permits.
So I'm happy with the year. As
long as that maybe in a memo to
us you know something back to us
via memo in about six months
just sort of check in on on on
how things are going okay say
something here. Um, I really
like this idea, but then I also
think that this is this is the
first time I actually got to see
the small businesses
representation and also the fire
department representation here
in my, my in my tenure working
or volunteering at city hall. It
really shows shows that there's
also a gentleman actually just
got out of the operation desk
and just to show up. These folks
do have I'm myself a small
business. I understand like
every second count and you make
your choice. Why you are aware
or you are that day to spend
your 24 hours and really
appreciate the study. And then
this is not about not wanting
share streets or not wanting
climate, you know, saving the
world, saving the earth. You
know, we are all in the same
focus here. We want this. We
want all these amazing things on
our street. This is about about,
in my understanding, hearing
from all sides. I'm also really
aware of that. The side that
actually has lesser voice are
the one that actually drown ing.
They can't. When you drown, you
can't even speak. So it is
really about the when we're
getting into the pandemic, it is
what I seen is like we all have
to improvise and just do
something where to get everyone
happier and make things happen
when normally we actually would
do something a little bit more
and try to figure out a plan and
a policy and accountability and
how we actually enforce certain
situation and if that actually
has had life and safety hazard
or concern. Right? So but we
don't we don't have the luxury
back then. We didn't do that.
And this is a really great time
to learn. And how to adapt and
different neighborhood is
different because the dynamic is
different. So I really
appreciate the our staff also
know the fire department, the
small businesses, and also our
mayor's office really reach out
to talk to everyone on not just
the few representation
representative of I'm really
aware of the people that
actually has less of a voice.
And I really want to give them
the equal opportunity to live
peacefully the way they want to
live. So I wanted to know if on
friday evening is there more
likelihood that the fire truck
needed the access to these zones
? Because I kind of remember
those nights where things are a
little bit more colorful in our
city. I mean, if, if that's not
really if that if that number
data is not available right now.
Um I don't I don't know how am I
able to justify doing the friday
night. Right. But my
understanding from what we heard
was that the new, the, the point
of the new design, even when it
is in effect on saturday, is
that we can accommodate fire
access, is that the fire
department was at the table and
has worked through this,
approved design. Correct. But
but my thing is here I'm seeing
this line saying the reason of
challenges is lack of activation
. And then point two is
inconsistently meeting permit
conditions such as barricade
placement and monitoring
intersections. So when folks got
the notice of violation in the
building department is because
once people got the permit and
they violated what they agreed
to do under that permit, so I'm
just using the similar
application on policy on permit
holder and how we can help each
other out to make our city safer
and better for everyone. So
yeah, I mean, I would just say
to mike, to the friday night
compromise, it sounds like if
we're coming up with barricade
placement that ameliorate some
of fire department's concerns
about folks double parking in
the intersection, then that's
going to be the new barricade
placement. So we'll see if that
actually works or not. And
adding friday night maybe just
gives more potential opportunity
for double parking, but we'll
know if it works right? If it if
the kind of curve works or not
in terms of activation like I
think the importance is like
when are people coming to this
area and they're going to want
to sit outside and enjoy
themselves. And I think the
public commenter who said like
like making people do like, like
the irish jig in the middle of
the street is not how we're
going to make these places cool.
it's by putting adirondack
chairs and umbrellas and like
just like letting human beings
be human beings. And I don't
know how we're defining
activation, but I don't think we
should be defining it as like,
like number of attendees who've
signed up to a flash mob on
eventbrite. Okay, I agree. I
think the example of the
adirondack I love that. Just to
jump in, director, I agree that
we would define that as
activation. It doesn't have to
be some live event. People using
the space and activating the
space. And I hope supervisor
preston's office, if they're
listening like maybe you can
provide some funding for this
neighborhood to buy some
adirondack chairs and some
umbrellas and some furniture to
like make it interesting. And
maybe you could also help the
merchants find a place to store
these things, maybe also helping
them to train folks that they
can actually monitor and better
with the barricade placements
and monitoring intersections is
so and these are all things that
we're eager to do, but we're
currently not staffed to do. We
are eager to develop a strategy
for helping make sure that these
activations are successful. But
that's currently not within our
means. I also just need to point
out that that changing the
recommendation to include
fridays will require that we
restart the entire process,
including forcing the community
to go back through the task
process and it loses about a at
least a month of staff time that
would require we halt progress
on other street activations
while we redo this process. So
just for your consideration, as
you think about what today's
action wait a second, haven't
they they've applied for a three
day permit. You we came back to
them and said we think it should
be one day. We've hauled them
out to the mta board for us to
presumably flush this out and we
can't go back to them and say,
as the mta board, we think you
applied for three days, we'll
give you a day and a half. So
deputy city attorney susan susan
cleveland-knowles MAY speak to
it, but why would you bring this
to us to, like discuss
directors? Deputy city attorney
susan cleveland-knowles so at
least for this hearing, you can
act today, day on director
teal's motion, which would amend
the resolution that's in front
of you. But we would recommend
you vote at your next meeting
because what was noticed on your
agenda for today was a one day
closure. It was a little
interesting notice, but it was
just for the one day. So we'd be
expanding it to a day and a half
. MAY I have just let me I'll
let you finish and. Sorry,
director. So let me just finish
on the task. Notice that I do
not have that in front of me. I
don't know if it was the
application and everyone
discussed all of the issues with
one, two and three days. If
that's the case, it MAY not need
to go back to task, but I can't
know that sitting here unless
this MISS Moonwatch understands
how that process worked. And
apologies, director. So for it
did go to escott in MARCH for
three days there was no action
taken, but at least that that
was a step taken with the
original application. Three days
there was not consensus, so we
weren't able to sort of approve
or deny at that time. So I don't
know if that would facilitate
that requirement or another
action step would be the likely
need to cut frequency on the 21
days, because friday night is
when the bus is experiencing the
most delay. As a result from the
friday evening commute,
congestion on the reroute. So
I'm going to jump in here. Okay,
director. So director tilghman,
you said something very
important, and I think it really
needs to be sort of fleshed out
and explained a little bit more.
You said there is near universal
agreement between sfmta staff
supervisor preston, the
merchants, the community on what
is the ultimate outcome. So I
think it's really important for
everybody here to hear you say
what is that ultimate outcome in
kind of specific terms so that
we actually know what we're
talking about. Could you
elaborate on that statement a
little bit more? Sure. I mean,
the outcome is a space that
fosters in enjoyment and
commercial success. It is a
space that's vibrant, that feels
safe for people of all ages and
abilities that supports the
merchants success while
accommodating the merchant
functionality like curbside
pickup and drop off somewhere.
Right I mean, we've we've seen
these streets all over the
world. We love them. We're
capable of delivering them here
in san francisco. But success
for these streets follows a very
specific set of requirements.
when we look at such successful
spaces around the world. And so
one of the key things that we're
working on trying to develop is,
is what is that entity that
fosters the activation? So can
we work with a nonprofit
organization to have commercial
activation in a box and a sort
of nonprofit that can receive
private funds and can staff up
around a certain amount of
expertise where the sfmta is
role is, is making sure that the
functional needs are taken care
of and that the safety
requirements are met for all
emergency services as well as
for traffic safety, as well as
to the extent that it's
appropriate, funneling public
money that can be then combined
with private money in order to
create barcelona or paris or,
you know, antigua, you know,
where where wherever it is that
you love. MAY I? MAY I? Yeah
yeah. MAY I? I don't want to
forgot my thought after being
interrupted, but I thought the
idea. So if. If a call is
entertained, my idea. If we
approve what the staff
recommended today with the
condition to monitor the if the
operators of the merchants
actually do work collaboratively
to address these challenges that
have been listed in here, they
could come back within this year
period of time to request for a
longer duration of street
closure. Yes, that's actually
exactly what we're trying to set
up by consolidating two
saturdays and investing in
success. We're eager to not only
allow, but actually encourage
the merchants to expand just as
quickly as they're ready. So
that's an unfriendly amendment
to my motion. I want to advocate
for adding friday nights back,
because it's been made clear to
me from the merchants that
friday nights was a very
successful evening for them. And
so if we're trying to emulate
what a successful street closure
feels like in this block, having
them continue to have a portion
of it, we're talking about five
hours where lots of people were
already coming to this
neighborhood, giving them an
opportunity to try it out on a
friday night. And a saturday,
which is a reduction by 50% of
what they had. So it's still
cutting it in half. Seems to me
like a fair compromise. And but
I agree, giving them this
opportunity, letting them
activate it, giving them a
little bit more time because it
sounds like some of the
merchants want it gone. Some
want it all the way to three
days. We've asked them to go to
nine hours. It's just giving
them a little bit more time to
figure this out on friday
nights. And. Yeah, I think it's
no one's going to be happy with
there's no one's going to be
happy with everything that comes
out of this. I'm just trying to
figure out a way to give that,
to give them a little bit more.
Yeah I acknowledge your intent
and I'm trying to work around.
So then also our agency doesn't
cause another month of payroll
to go back into the drawing
board and come back again. I
mean, you know, so then we
approve it now so they can
actually start trying this out.
And the merchants will really
start to operate it in the way
that the permit is intended for
them to do, and then they can
come back and then add that
those hours back. Director
henderson, you want to weigh in.
I'm really I have a question for
the city attorney, because I
didn't understand the order of
operations that you laid out. So
if we I hear the amendment or.
Yeah, right now I hear there's
it's too it's too I want to add
friday night and I want us to
study making it permanent, how
much it would cost, what it
would look like. Okay and so
that's different than my
recommendation is approve it
right now and let's with the
condition of monitoring the
merchants operation now and then
giving them an opportunity to
extend the operational hours
within this year of the permit.
So then we can policy. Why
administrative, why we can
actually proceed according to
the timeline and we don't have
to wait another 30 days of
moniker and the rest of the
team's time. But but what's on
the agenda today or how to, I
guess I'm trying to figure out
like whatever the vote is today.
I heard you say something then
could occur in a month. And so
what? So, yeah, let me so first
of all, director, sir, was that
a motion that you were making a
recommendation of the. Yeah as a
motion that I recommend. Okay.
To work around with everybody.
The, the, the, the, the
circumstances we have and with
the fiscal responsibility that
we have as an agency and also
the yearning for the merchants
that director to share with us
and also seeing on the our staff
and also the small businesses.
and also can I do a hybrid fire
department? Can I do a hybrid
motion of these two? I just
hoping to capture the best of
both to clarify what what did we
actually henderson's? Yeah, let
me just reply to director
henderson's the, the reason I
asked is if. If director feels
motion which has a second by
director hensey is voted on
today, it would be a motion to
amend what's in front of you
today to add it to a day and a
half based on what MISS Munich
said, it sounds like it was
noticed at escott for three
days, in which case I do not
think it would need to go back
to escott. It would just come
back to you here at your next
meeting for a vote with the
notice for fridays and saturday,
and I'll be watching. Oh if
director sos motion is seconded
and approved, she does not have
a second at this point. But if
she does have a second and it's
approved, it would become
effective. You would vote on it
and it would you wouldn't do
anything else except vote today.
It would not come back to you
have I answered your question?
Yes okay. Thank you. If there is
a third motion, it looks like we
got a supervisor in the room
from the chair. Then we would
need to discuss that. Okay. I am
going to make a third motion,
but supervisor preston, would
you like to address the board?
Thank you very much. Usually I
don't have the pleasure because
our board meetings are going at
the same time as yours. And this
one ended early and I was
listening to some of the
discussion and decided to stop
by. So thank you for the
comments on this. And you you
all obviously know the
background. I do want to just
emphasize a couple things. First
of all, there is incredible
community support for the three
day active activation motion and
car free space that we have now
had for several years. And to
undo that on basically a week's
notice, maybe 8 or 9 days is, I
believe is would really is not
going over well in the community
I represent and is not going
over well with with our office s
the I would understand the
board's reluctance given the
staff recommendation to move
forward today with a full three
day closure. And I understand
from the conversations that's
not where the discussion is
headed. I do not understand and
want to reiterate our request
that this matter be continued.
And there is absolutely no
reason that all stakeholders
cannot be brought together to
plan out an activation that is
satisfactory to mta staff to
preserve of this three days here
at and to. It makes little sense
to take that action now. Now my
understanding is in terms of
temporary authorizations that it
could continue on a temporary
basis through DECEMBER. There's
nothing expiring here in terms
of authorization to continue on
a temporary basis at and we
really run the risk by adopting
something that limits us to a
day or even two days of severely
undermining the program. And
sending, I think, a message the
opposite of what we should be
sending in terms of having a
vision of really trying to
protect and expand the car free
space in in our city. So I just
want to reiterate the request
and I know you have multiple
motions and procedurally we'll
figure out where you want to go
at the same time, I do think a
motion to continue would be in
order and would take precedence,
if I'm not mistaken, over the
various, I guess three different
to three different motions that
you've got. But what what I've
not heard at all is any reason
why this has to be done against
the wishes of so many in the
community on about a week's
notice just doesn't make any
sense. Gives us some space. Our
office community leaders are
looking forward to doing
whatever it takes to preserve
this for multiple days. And
finally, I just want to say,
because as a avid supporter of
public transit in san francisco
with all due respect, using the
21 bus as an excuse is not going
over well. As someone who rides
that bus daily, that thing is
running once every 20 minutes.
So if there's a problem with
service right now, it's not
about the shared spaces and the
threats of friday activation to
ongoing bus service. It's the
fact that the bus is barely
running at this point on a
shortened route three times an
hour. So supervisor preston, can
I just bring you in? I don't
know if you've been watching,
but can I bring you in on on an
important thread of this
conversation and get your
perspective on this? Sure. I
think that director uchitelle
made a very compelling point,
which is that we want the rules
of the road. To be clear, we
want people to understand what's
going on and that the clearest
solution is actually to look at
something more like a 24 over
seven closure rather than well,
which days of the week. I can't
keep track. And this is causing
frustration and we don't want
that. I can't even remember what
what nights it is. And I go
there all the time. So. So
that's compelling to me. And
that that that that gives an
opportunity for some more
permanent placemaking and
permanent community and that you
made the point that popping up
and going away and popping up
and going away doesn't actually
kind of create something
meaningful. So I just wonder in
all your dialogs and
conversations, is that your
vision as well? Look, our
offices vision is we would
absolutely be supportive of
looking at ways to expand the
hours we've worked. We've tried
to balance the various interests
around the days, and I know I've
spoken with some of you and with
director tumlin about what's
been an evolving you know,
originally it was a three block
closure to private vehicles. Has
since become the one block happy
to discuss. And I think there
would be significant community
support for more like a round
the clock type closure. But
again, I don't think these kind
of decisions should be on the
fly, constricting it or
exploring the broader closure.
The again, there's no reason
these, you know, these kind of
decisions should be made on
this. The kind of 7 to 10 day
timeline. So I'm wide open to
and I appreciate that suggestion
and I do think that would give
increased clarity to folks. I
think we have to we would have
to talk to the businesses and
the residents. Right. About
their views of the of the 24
hour closure. But our office,
certainly, to the extent there
was community support for that,
would be supportive of that. But
what I'm concerned about is
what's before you right now, as
I understand it, is eliminating
70% of the hours. I will just
tell you on behalf of my
constituents and from my office
that that is perceived as and I
believe accurately perceived as
a gutting of car free. Hayes
that is unnecessary. And that to
the extent we can have a
collaborative discussion and
bring everyone together and
explore these kind of
possibilities, I see no reason
that can't be put over a number
of weeks or we had recommended
early DECEMBER here that I'd
like to go ahead and put my
motion forward for
consideration. Thank you,
colleagues. Thank you for being
here. Did you want to respond to
the supervisor's comments? I
have a quick point of
clarification. If I can. Go
ahead. I just wanted to in the
spirit of things being clear on
the street and the hours, they
are closed, I just want to make
sure it's top of mind and doing
my transit colleagues justice
that as I understand from them,
the friday difficulty of a part
day is really challenging for
reroute possible. But when it's
a part day, it is difficult not
just because of the yard
compared to the weekend, but how
they do it for when it's not a
whole day. And it impacts riders
as well. When they they know
know to pick up the bus part of
the day versus another part not
it's solvable but it is just a
trade off. I want to be
transparent about for fridays as
well as the fact that we're
going to be going into earlier
evenings very soon. It'll be
dark sooner. Yeah. And that just
means nighttime activations are
just feel a little different
into the winter. Okay. Thank
you. So I would like to
recommend that we approve. We
take action today that we
approve what is before us and
what has been noticed and what
has been studied of the saturday
permit, because that is a
foundation as vice chair kahina
said so eloquently that we can
build upon that is not a
ceiling. That is a foundation.
So we take that action, we
approve that piece, we direct
staff to study and explore if
there are solutions on the
friday night closure and come
back to us within six months
with a recommendation. If we
want to add that piece in and
that we look at what it would
take a study of what it would
take to actually make it
permanent to your vision.
Director of the 24 over seven,
which MAY ultimately be the
evolution that makes the most
sense for this community. So
that would be three pieces
moving forward and you would get
to vote on it today. So jerry
can for clarity, what was that
that middle piece? So we've got
we've got the approving ones
before us today. And the study
of and then we would direct
staff to look at just rather
than doing this on the fly, we
would direct staff to look at
the friday night piece which
we've heard from the community
as meaningful. But rather than
doing it today, we would study
that and make sure that we're
working through the issues with
our operators whose concerns we
take very seriously and come
back to us in six months with a
recommendation of what you what
you think is the right way to go
forward to potential add fridays
and study what what it would
take to make this permanent in
line with so many people's
visions that we've heard today.
So then the duration then would
still be a year or sorry, sorry.
Director lindsay, the permit
duration, would that still be a
year that under your motion
permit duration would be a year.
But I'm open to alternatives. If
people feel strongly. Right
right. So you're recommending a
year as well? Yeah okay. Okay.
So can I respond to your I mean,
we'll vote on all these
amendments and see where the
votes hit. But this street
closure has been worked on by
our staff and by the community
and nauseam. There's been two
surveys, multiple departments,
the mayor's office, the
supervisor, his office. I think
there are two competing
petitions us from from multiple
groups about what should happen
and should not happen. I just
don't want to send our folks out
there and have to do like a
whole nother set of surveying
and look ing and wondering and
just to come back to add five
hours. And so I just I actually
don't think that more study
about what the community wants
is what is needed right now. I
think they need I think they
need to be given their
parameters of what the street
closure should be. I think the
merchants have heard loud and
clear, I don't want to speak for
them that the mta wants certain
things to be done, not mta, but
also fire the community like
this has been bruising. So I
think we should we should we
deserve to give them some
clarity about what this block
should look like and then we
should give them the opportunity
to try to make it happen. So I
would just say from the
perspective of like putting this
to bed a bit, having them like
we think we might want to give
you friday night, but we want to
give you like a couple of months
to see if you can do friday
night. Like it just feels very
unsettling. So I think whatever
should come out of this, we
should be giving them clear
parameters. We don't we don't
make them come back to scott and
go through that whole process
again and then just let them try
to make this work or not work.
That's just my reaction to your
to your third. But we should
vote. See what people think
after the fire forgot how to
address you. Fire marshal. Fire
marshal was trying to say
something to us earlier. I
wonder if he'd like to share. I
just wanted to respond to
director sos inquiry regarding
feedback. As as monica stated,
they're not there 24/7. We're
we're working 24 over seven. And
we provided consistent feedback.
When we have problems. Actually,
one of the slides, one of the
pictures was one we took our
when we couldn't get through or
upon return from a call. So we
you will receive feedback
because the fire department will
send mta feedback of incidents
that occur. And that has
happened consistently over the
last year with lloyd through
monica has received feedback
regarding it and hence the
reason why we modified the cones
in response to the inability to
staff the ends. So whatever you
approve, we don't the fire
department doesn't have a
problem with it. We just want to
be able to get through. Okay.
That's that's all it is. So we
provide soul feedback on can we
get through when we need to in
an emergency situation. So you
will receive consistent feedback
from us because we have let our
companies in the field know we
have our own process internally
to feed that through. It goes to
my office and then I just send a
nice little message over to
monica and she can go ahead and
archive that. So I want to let
you know you will receive
feedback, whether it's one day,
two days, three days through mta
what kind of response we're
going to give. Okay. So that's
all I wanted to say is you can't
get feedback. Director tomlin
can you can you just please
explain how significant of an
issue the 21 friday piece is?
Because we want to honor the
fact that this streets change
exists within a part of a
multimodal agency, and we want
to honor our transit colleagues.
I can't quite tell how much of a
concern this is. Monica, do you
want to speak to this or I will
try my best. So two things is I
think when they reroute, there's
certain shifts that an operator
takes. And I think when it's
broken up and when you only
close the street for the five
hours in the weekend and on a
day like on friday, it is proven
to be very difficult for those
shifts. So an operator comes
into the shift. It could be
midway through a shift. They've
actually driven through the
closure a few times on fridays
and we've had photos sent to us
and it's like, oh my goodness,
and a problem. We can work
through. But it is unique to
fridays in terms of shift. And
then the second piece again was,
I believe, the presidio versus
the kirkland yard, presidio yard
on the friday services trolley
busses overhead wires. And that
reroute is also different for
oh, julie, just in time. We're
we're a three minute time delay
back there. Okay so I would love
to just hear what you just said
and then I'm happy to. Julie I
was explaining about a friday
closure in the 21 that there are
my understanding the presidio
serves it on fridays, that there
are shifts that operator takes.
So if the closure is just 4 to
10, it has proven to be a little
bit difficult for operators and
how they're communicating. And
it could be part way through a
shift versus the weekend and the
kirkland yard, those operators
have much clearer understanding
of what they need to do with a
longer day closure and also the
rubber tire busses can maneuver
around the closure a little bit
more easily. So it's clear from
this discussion that there's a
lot of moving parts to this
issue and transit does not want
to be a barrier to follow thing.
The board's direction on this
topic. We do currently have to
go off wire in order to
implement this change. That's
very easy to do. When we remove
the wire, the poles from the
wire because that doesn't
require the operator to get out
of the vehicle. So it is a
little harder when we go back
onto the wire because cause even
with some of the pans we have
that direct the wire, there's
still about a 1 in 3 chance that
the operator is going to have to
get out of the vehicle. We also
had some challenges is kind of
with with this friday shutdown
because it happens mid shift so
we did have especially when the
barriers were not put in place,
we did have operators that
either didn't receive the proper
training or just kind of lost
the. We're not we're not
expecting it and went through
the project area instead of
doing the reroute because it
happens mid-shift it's
definitely harder to for us to
manage something thing that
doesn't happen all day long but
that being said, we have other
places that we are dealing with
complexity in the transit system
. So we will certainly be follow
the board's guidance and make
whatever our kind of solution we
come to work. For the 21 days
and for the customers having
more, much better support on
signage is critical and having
support on the barriers is
critical, which I know is
something that we have
communicated to the project
sponsors via the via monica.
Okay. Some times my colleagues
use the term blocking concern.
Do you have a blocking concern
with us approving friday night?
No. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Any
other colleagues want to weigh
in. Okay. I think procedurally
I'll look to you, susan, what's
the best first order of business
here? We have these three
motions. You only have one
motion that has a second motion.
That's a second. Marnie's motion
on the table. And also for
procedure for christine is also
a good resource here. Okay um,
so can you, can you can you
restate your motion, director
uchitel, for clarity for
everyone? It's to amend the item
to add 5 to 10 P.M. On friday
nights and to require the sfmta
to study the cost and the design
potential design options for a
permanent street closure on this
block of hayes with been. Six
months, six months to just study
those questions study the
permanent peace. Yeah how much
it would cost and what it could
look like. Yeah 24 seven but
that's it. Was it different than
what you were suggesting at
first? No no, I don't think so.
No it's seemed to me okay. Is
she trying to comment? No, I was
just backing up. Director. You
could you. Okay. And you still
second that motion? Director
hensley. Yes. Um, yes. Yes.
Assuming so. Director or deputy
city attorney susan
cleveland-knowles. You're saying
that we're not going to hold
your feet to the fire, but
you're saying that this would
not probably need to go to as
GOD? So with so we could vote on
this today and then it come back
at our next meeting and then
it'd be would be binding on.
Yeah. Okay sorry. Director
hensley. Yes. So the vote today
for director yaku would be to
amend the resolution that's in
front of you. But because it
expands the number of days and
hours noticed for today, that
resolution would be brought back
to you on NOVEMBER seventh or
whenever the secretary calendars
it and you would vote on it at
that point. We appreciate you.
Yes. Still second that motion,
you would vote on the amending
the resolution today. Yes. Then
the resolution would be amended.
And you would then we would re
notice it with the appropriate
days and times. And it would
come back to you at your next
meeting. Yes. Okay and it could
be on your consent calendar or
not. Okay that's your preference
to have no action today? Well,
it's not no action on it's
amending the resolution and you
guys have to do a vote. You have
to vote on an amended resolution
. Director hemminger, please.
Well, I'm not going to make a
motion because we've got plenty
of those. I do want to ask a
question. Supervisor preston
indicated that he had gotten
very little notice about this
proposal. So what are the facts
on that question? I'll defer to
staff. Monica minovitch sure. Um
the permit expired in MARCH, so
we've been working with the
community since MARCH. They
were, for example, went to a
public hearing in MARCH because
the permit expired and we've
worked directly with the
supervisor's office through the
summer to while they've been in
this sort of transition period.
And and when did the one day
come up for first versus three
days, which is the status quo?
Early SEPTEMBER for about a
month and a half ago at the
completion of the stakeholder
meetings is when we first
brought that back to the
community. Well, labor day
weekend, you know, there are a
lot of ideas on the table here
and I'm just trying to
distinguish among and between
them. It sounds like director
yakhchals idea cannot take
effect until a subsequent
meeting and I don't know why. We
just couldn't take advantage of
the fact if that's true and I'd
call it a continuance until that
meeting. And talk to people and
vet the idea that he's suggested
as a compromise, which seems
reasonable to me, and go forth
from there, you could call it a
continuance. You could call it a
delayed reaction in which I
guess is the implication of the
motion that is on the table from
director yekutiel. Does that all
track with you? Council well,
yes. That is correct. Also, just
because you amend the resolution
today does not necessarily mean
you need to have the same vote
at the next meeting. So you
could approve director yakhchals
motion today and but you could
also direct staff to notice it's
a broader spec item of dates and
times. You know, I'm not going
to go into potted plants today,
but but it seems to me this is
one of those moments again. And
I just don't think we have a
satisfac free way of dealing
with uncertain certainty because
as you bring a staff
recommendation to us at a board
meeting, we want to change it,
which is what policy boards are
allowed to do. And we're told
that, oh, in that case you've
got to wait 30 days or 60 days
or and it's sort of that
information is being weaponized
against us. So that we adhere to
the staff recommend motion
instead of having a better way
to handle an independent policy
view. And I think if it has to
do with just how we organize as
the meeting and how we
characterize the items so that
we have some wiggle room in this
case, the wiggle room is one day
or three and twos in between. So
if we had written it so that we
could have chosen chosen among
them again, I just don't think
the process should be a way of
tipping the scales on whether we
approve your recommendation on
or approve one of our own and
I'm afraid we're stumbling into
that too often. I certainly hear
what you're saying, director. We
have talked about this issue
before of making sure that for
our more challenging or
controversial projects that we
invest the extra staff time
necessary to have a discussion
item first to get feedback and
then do the additional staff
work to have potential multiple
completed resolutions is
available to you. And I realize
that's a drag, but I do think it
would allow us to have a pure
policy discussion instead of
worrying about what is this
going to trigger this codicil on
the brown act? Yes. So we're in
complete agreement. However,
you've also provided us with a
direction to move a lot more
quickly. And the greatest
constraints that we face here,
in addition to money, is staff
time. And our staff time is our
staff. Availability is shrinking
dramatically right now. So we
are simultaneously trying to
deliver more with fewer people
and that means making some hard
choices about where are we
directing the staff time regard
to with regard to decisions like
this. In this case, we made a
judgment that that because what
we were doing, because there's
agreement about the outcome,
we're wanting to take action
about the floor or to build from
towards that outcome and that we
can change that outcome at any
time. We could change it three
months from now if we figure out
some solutions to the problem.
But in the meantime, we needed a
real permit and so in this case,
the staff recommendation was to
move quickly to establish the
floor for and then use our staff
time to build success rather
than using staff time with more
bureaucratic processes and
writing additional resolution
for a more for a policy choice
to happen here. And I have to
say, colleagues, I find that to
be compelling. And that is why I
am motivated to act today as
opposed to continue this, which
then involves more staff time,
more process, more dialog, more
bureaucracy. And I'll heat up a
vote today. My bias is to second
chair egan's motion. The rules
of order. Thank you. So we have
two motions with a second and I
want to state something that
according to the slide that I
got today with the report that
the office of the small
businesses actually went out and
conducted aid and reached out to
the merchants on these three
blocks and 92% of them. And the
result I'm seeing is that 66% of
them are in favor for prefer or
satisfied with a one day
closure. I just want to state
that that on record. So, susan,
we have two motions now. One is
for an action today. One is to
amend the motion. How do you
advise we proceed, christine, do
you want to answer that question
or my understanding is that you
would take the first motion
first. So director patel's
motion. Okay. Which has a
second. They both have a second
now. They both do, yes. Okay so
are we trying to weigh in again?
Well I was I think trying to ask
you a question because, again,
getting back to the point, I was
making, there's going to be a
delay either way. Right unless
your motion is approved. And if
director udall's motion is
approved, it can't take effect
until all the next meeting at
the earliest. Right okay. Yes
yes. Or we can act today.
Continuing to evaluate friday
with our transit operators to
study the 24/7 closure and keep
moving forward of trying to act
fast. I don't know how much more
, more discussion we need to
have about one versus two versus
three. It's three choices. One,
right after the other. And there
there clearly is not consensus
on. Three and one on. And so
that I believe, is why direct
tory was trying to come up with
to and so I don't know how much
more vetting to would have to
take. But if we do the vetting
and it comes back and we can
say, okay, we're going to do two
instead, or we're going to keep
three, or we're going to do. One
my understanding from staff,
this was always your intention
on approve this floor today,
continue dialog, continue
building activation, continue to
explore what the vision is for
this space. So that's
consistent. That's right. And in
particular, remove the hardest
day, which is friday in order to
build success and then once
there is success, we can
reevaluate fridays. Can I just
throw another bone in here?
What? What it sounds like, at
least from the staff
perspective, that friday night
presents a lot of difficulties.
What if we give them sunday
instead of friday and. In that
way we remove the like, the
potential issues with the shifts
and the 21 days and I'm just
trying to throw the merchants
who really love this and think
it's really helpful to their
businesses a bone here. I am not
advocating for staff to go back
and do a whole nother round of
surveying and talking to the
merchants and figuring out one
versus the other. I do not want
to advocate for that. Director
henderson. So I what I'm
hearing, I just want to be
clear. What I'm hearing is not
necessarily go back and study
one, two or 2 or 3 days, but go
back and study, move forward
today and study permanent, which
would be beyond three days. But
instead, the entire set of
blocks for or 24 over seven. And
I think that so I don't think
that there's a today I don't
hear a choice between the one or
the two or the three days. It's
either one, one or or not or we
continue for this half a day,
whichever days of the week. I
guess we can work that out with
the, you know, by next month.
But study but I hear the
direction is figure out the next
the possibility for a long term
24/7 closure right and so can we
make sure that or can we add
that direction to study to any
of the motions that come forward
? Because it sounds like that's
where the that sounds like the
goal or the end goal of this is
to figure out what's possible
for the long term, whether
whether we land on one, two,
three days. I think that was in
both. Yes. Okay. And so we vote
now or you know, whenever your
direction is. But we vote first
on on director hotels. Day and a
half proposal and we don't does
that day and a half have to be
specific like do we have to say
15 hours between friday and
saturday or can it be open like
we were suggesting in the staff
and the merchant groups? Figure
out the best 15 hours of the
weekend to do it. Can I respond
to that? The reason I proposed
friday night is because it was
communicated to me from the
merchants that that period of
time that that luscious kernel
of time was the time that people
were utilizing this space the
most. And so trying to protect
the time that people are
actually going to hayes valley
and eating and want to be out on
the street. And we all want it
to be successful. But so the
idea is giving them a little bit
of more of that time to utilize.
And so that's why I wanted it to
be specific, because we've done
a lot of feedback. We've done a
lot of surveying. That's what's
been communicated to me as like
an important time not to lose.
Okay so yeah, I do want to keep
it specific. I do want to I do
want to amend the resolution to
add friday nights. We both are
in agreement that we want to
study what 24 hours would look
like, though. Okay so just from
a process standpoint, so
everyone understands if director
kaushal's motion is approved,
that's it, then there's not a
possibility to take an action
today, correct? Sure you can. If
I could correct myself. I'm
sorry. Okay the substitute
motion should be voted on first.
So your your motion. The second
one should be voted on first and
then we can go to the original
motion. Okay. And then process
wise, if that motion to approve
today and study the longer term
as director henderson laid out,
if that's approved, how do we
then why accurately consider the
other motion? Because that feels
like direction today. Whatever.
If the first motion that's voted
on is approved, then that's
that's done. Okay, but not like
a why not me vibe. But if I, I
propose my motion first and it
was seconded first and shouldn't
shouldn't since that was the
first amendment, that motion
that was proposed in second,
shouldn't that do I not
understand the rules properly?
Maybe I don't. Is that the
direction of our secretary if I
don't at this point, five years
later, the situation should get
voted on first? Is there any
understanding as a substitute.
I've been substituted. You're
the main motion. No, she's the
substitute. Your main motion.
Okay okay. So we're going to
call a vote on the proposal,
which is to move forward today.
Move forward with the floor of
saturday. Closure for directing
staff to study the question
that's been raised of the friday
night and just make sure that
works for our transit partners
to bring back as soon as you're
ready recommendation on that
piece as well as to study the
larger 24 over seven closure,
which has been seconded. Could
you please call the roll on that
motion? This is your this is
chair eakins motion. Correct.
Okay. Correct it. If I MAY, just
quickly ask the city attorney,
there was a resolve clause that
that staff needed to add to this
approval. Yes. That is correct.
The vehicle code requires for a
road closure that your
resolution includes the
following an additional resolve
clause that for the reasons
discussed in the public hearing,
the sfmta board finds that the
street closure is necessary for
the safety and protection of
persons who are using that
portion of the street during the
closure. So, chair aitken, if
you could amend your motion to
include that language, so we
would appreciate it. Thank you.
Deputy city attorney
cleveland-knowles okay. On that
motion and the amendment.
Director hemminger no grenade
director henderson. Hi,
henderson. I director hinsey no.
And director. So yes. So I.
Director uchitel. No. Uchitel
no. Director kalena nay. Kehena
no. Chair aitken a chicken. And
I thank you that motion passes 4
to 3. No, it doesn't pass. I
think we. Oh my gosh. Only I'm
sorry three votes. So that
motion fails. Okay, we can go
back to the second. The original
motion director uk'otoa's motion
director teal's motion is to
amend the resolution to add the
friday evenings and require the
agency to study potential
permanent street closure of hay
street. And don't forget, deputy
on that and susan
cleveland-knowles amendment to
very good thank you. And what
about the sunday versus friday
thing that you just put in play?
I'm going to I'm we're going to
forget that. Okay. Yeah. Thank
you. Can someone repeat one more
time? This motion is the motion
is to amend the resolution
motion to add friday evening and
require the agency to study
potential permanent street
closures of hay street within
six months. And to add the
amendment, as stated by the city
attorney, adding that resolve
clause. Okay go ahead and call
the roll director hemminger. Hi
hemminger. Director henderson.
Hi henderson. I director hinsey.
Hi, director. So. Director. So
I'm thinking can you go to
somebody else first? No, you
can't. No we cannot. This is
voting to just amend this
resolution and not take a vote.
Not take an action today. All
right. I so I. Director yuku a
yuku I director coquina coquina
I chair egan egan. I thank you.
That motion is passes
unanimously. Okay. Next item.
Let's go ahead and call the next
item. Thank you. Item 11
amending transportation code
division two, section 601 to
designate full time transit only
area on hyde street between
eddie and mcallister streets and
approving various traffic and
parking modifications between
geary and mcallister streets to
improve transit and pedestrian
safety as part of the hyde
street. Quick build project
includes items a through. To you
in the agenda. Okay.
Can you hear me okay? Yes, go
ahead. Thank you. Um. Thanks.
Good afternoon, chair ekin
directors. My name is jennifer
molina and my senior
transportation planner in the
streets division in the project
manager for the hyde street
quick build. I'd like to
recognize the entire project
team. This project was a team
effort across multiple
divisions. But most importantly,
this project would not be before
the board today without the
determination of the tenderloin
community. Before jumping to
hyde street, I want to provide a
quick overview. Two of the
important work city staff and
community partners have
accomplished over the past
several years in the tenderloin.
This map highlights the various
traffic safety and street
changes that have taken place in
the community. This includes
four quick builds, two shared
spaces and a neighborhood wide
no turn on red and speed limit
reduction from 25 to 20mph. This
work would not have been
possible without the dedicated
advocacy work of those who live
and work in the tenderloin. So
hyde street quick build. It's
the fifth quick build in the
tenderloin. Our quick build
efforts continue to inform our
agency's ongoing outreach and
engagement practices. Hyde's
outreach process was centered on
partnering with community
residential based groups within
the community. Also, I want to
point out that this team
continues to work closely with
our transit priority team, who
are leading the high transit
project that that went to the
board earlier this month. This
ongoing ongoing coordination was
key to advancing this proposal.
proposal you see today. So hyde
street today, hyde street is
busy, mixed use corridor with a
variety of civic facilities,
libraries, parks, as well as
small businesses, apartments,
sros and health and service
oriented organizations. It's
also a very popular pedestrian
corridor for those walking or
strolling and rolling,
especially for families, seniors
and people with disabilities.
High street is a one way
southbound corridor with three
vehicle lanes between geary and
mcallister street. It also has
parking on both sides of the
roadway and loading the 19, polk
wrote in three golden gate
transit regional bus routes
travel on the hyde street within
this project corridor to the 19,
polk connects several
neighborhoods, including
neighborhoods identified in the
muni service equity strategy on
average, one person on hyde is
hit every month based on five
years of collision data over
half of those collisions are
pedestrians. The top three most
frequent crashes crash types are
drivers failure to lead and
yield in the crosswalk, followed
by red light violations and
unsafe speeds. Starting in fall
of 2022, our project team
focused on listening and
relationship building with
community stakeholders along
hyde and nearby. This work
included several visioning
sessions with our community
partners to co-develop an
outreach plan. Partners included
organized and residents from the
community, including the
tenderloin, people's congress,
cbd, safe passage, the
tenderloin, traffic safety task
force and code tenderloin in
winter of spring of 2023, the
outreach team focused mostly on
in-person engagement, including
pop ups in block to block
outreach stakeholder meetings
were also set up to connect with
community and resident based
groups, both virtually and in
person. So during this listening
period, the outreach team
collected hundreds of surveys,
mostly in person, to understand
project priorities and top
traffic safety concerns. The top
four priorities include ensuring
pedestrian safety, improving
transit reliability, considering
a protected mobility lane and
speed reduction on. So based on
these priorities and the
feedback collected on both
phases of outreach staff
recommend actually, I apologize.
Slide eight building up the
team's first phase of outreach,
the project team developed two
quick build design options as
understanding a hybrid approach
was important for outreach. The
team developed an interactive
story map that presented project
background and walked viewers
through proposals with an option
to take a brief survey. Our
outreach team also organized
several in-person tabling events
and workshops at trusted
community spaces and sros to
review designs and engage with
project staff. These workshops
included monolingual events in
both spanish and chinese. Okay
so based on these priorities and
feedback during both phases of
outreach, staff are recommending
advancing a road diet between
geary and eddy in a transit only
lane from eddy to mcallister
street intersection safety
improvements at ellis and eddy
would include painted safety
zones and left turn safety
treatments. The project also
includes a modest curb
management plan that proposes
additional or extended color
curb to provide more space for
loading and also to deter double
parking. Given the growing
interest in the community to see
a protected north to south.
Mobility lane in the
neighborhood, the team did
propose a similar design to our
recommendation that also
included an east side running
mobility lane. The design
proposal for a quick build was
was limited by several
constraints for the project team
that included existing bulb
outs, muni service loading and
parking in emergency response
needs. One of the major trade
offs with the design. With this
design specifically was that all
east side parking and loading
would need to be removed for the
entire six blocks. While it was
clear that the tenderloin
community is in support of a
protected mobility lane, the
design this design would further
exacerbate parking and loading
challenges, especially for small
businesses, but also for
paratransit and taxi services.
Staff are still committed to
working with the tenderloin
community to identify a north
and south mobility lane. There
is currently an opportunity to
identify future active
transportation projects and
policies with within the active
communities plan. So so given
the team's recommendation today,
we are asking the board to
consider for approving the
transit lanes on hyde street
between eddy and mcallister
street in improving traffic and
parking modifications on hyde
between geary and mcallister
streets. If approved, quick
build implementation would start
in late OCTOBER into early
NOVEMBER. For this project will
also be followed by a six month
evaluation in spring of 2024.
Our project work will also
include ongoing coordination
with our transit colleagues,
both in construction and project
evaluation. That concludes my
presentation. An and thank you
for your time. Thank you so much
for your presentation. Jennifer
directors, are there any
clarifying questions? Yes, I did
have some questions, but I'm
very scared. If I MAY. Yes,
please. Before director lindsay.
Um just a few comments and
questions. First question
questions. I know that when the
transit only lane came before us
last week, we talked to we
talked about an express some
concern around the fulton plaza,
um, surrounding areas. And I, I
know that staff has been doing
some work around those
intersections. So I don't know
if kimberly or jennifer, you
want to sort of summarize at a
high level where we're at with
those, um, with those
discussions. Sure I can speak to
the updates that I have. And
also kimberly is here to add if
needed. So thank you, director,
for that question. Yes and so as
part we did receive some
feedback from community members
around some of the pedestrian
safety concerns they had at
fulton and hyde as well as
fulton and larkin. And that's
really essentially with the
farmers market moving over to
the fulton plaza, the there is a
there is a concern around
people, particularly seniors and
people with disabilities,
accessing that and crossing over
. So our team did actually look
at some options. And we are we
are recommending right now is
installing large wide painted
safety zones is essentially to
shorten the crossing distance
for people, but to also increase
visibility through the
application of post and some
khaki khaki paint essentially.
And that one we know is feasible
on the larkin. So on the west
side of larkin, we can do so.
It's just a beefed up version of
a painted safety zone. We've
done it along. Lincoln and this
is something we know we can do
and do fairly quickly. The
option on hyde and fulton is a
little bit more complex since
we're working with our transit
colleagues as well as there's
ongoing construction with the
with the project work that our
colleagues over at ruskin park
are doing. We have to see if and
when that actual application of
a large painted safety zone
would be actually feasible and
so that's ongoing conversation
with with transit and our city
colleagues. But we are committed
to the larkin and fulton
application of a large
pedestrian safety painted safety
zone. And that I think at this
point we anticipate we could
complete that by end of year.
Excellent. And thank you for
looking into that so quickly and
um, we've, we've had a lot of
conversations around and other
hearings today and needing to
come back with other hearings.
So um, and I don't want, I don't
want to put the community
through another hearing so can
you maybe clarify that we
wouldn't need a additional
legislation? Yeah. No, that's a
great question. I think well,
essentially for the larkin
fulton location in the area
where we're actually proposed
posing a painted safety note
painted safety zone is already a
tan set. So essentially we
wouldn't we wouldn't have to go
through through a legislation
process there. The other
location, again, I don't have
information on the hyde fulton
location. We still need to see
if and when that's actually
possible. Yes. And then my last
question and then have comments
and gratitude for the team. But
our last question is, I know
that there is some concern
around when the this segment of
the transit only lane is going
to be color colorized. And I, I
know that transit technically
considers is this a you know
highlight while we look at the
design so if we if you could
speak to that speak to that I
know staff intends to colorize
it at some point in the future.
No thank you for that question.
And I do want to note some
transit only lanes in the city
are not necessarily colorized
red. So in terms of the question
around and I just want to
confirm you're asking whether
the section from eddie to
mcallister would be colorized
red, correct? Yep correct. All
right. Thanks. Well, at this
time, we are not colorizing the
section between mcallister and
eddie red. We our plan is to
actually evaluate the
effectiveness, effectiveness of
the travel of the transit lane
as part of our six month
evaluation plan, including
looking at transit travel times
and the reliability of the 19.
Poke our conversation with our
transit colleagues is
essentially any reduction in the
speed or impact to the 19 poke
will require us to review and
look at the revision of our
design, how it's functioned
operationally wise, like in
terms of our our lanes, how
operators are feeling and then
that would include the option to
colorize to increase driver
compliance between eddie and
mcallister street. I think this
evaluation actually the timeline
syncs up really well with our
agency's commitment to colorize
hyde between mcallister and
market in mid 2024. So meaning
the entire eight blocks could be
colorized on a similar timeline.
But we really would like to use
this time to make observations
and monitor how this extension
of the transit only lane on hyde
is working. I would. I would
actually agree with you. You you
you know as well as I do that um
that this project for the
transit lane is it's also a
transit lane but it's also a
road diet. But I know because of
the design of the transit lane
that we need to assess the
effectiveness of a transit lane.
But it it is critical as a road
diet. But I do understand that
we need we need to evaluate it
before we paint it red. So I I'm
actually and I know that staff
knows that in portions of the
road diet to the community. So
those are those are my questions
and colleagues I have been sort
of involved in the outreach
process and working sort of I've
had jennifer can attest I've had
many meetings with staff about
this and I just want to
emphasize that jennifer has done
a very intense level of outreach
to the community. And she was
being very modest in regards to
the amount of work that she's
done. So I did just want to read
commend the team for this model
of outreach that we've taken up.
And I know that you will.
There's a commitment there to
work with the tenant and
continue to work with the
tenderloin community. Also so
and I know that there is a
vision within the tenderloin
community to have a protected
bike lane of some sort someday.
And I know that staff isn't
necessarily giving up on giving
up on that. So I will. And I
know that we'll continue to do
an increased amount of work in
the tenderloin. And so I just
want to acknowledge that. And I
think to that end, kerrigan
pending discussion and public
comment, I will make a motion to
approve the project. Second, it
great. There's a motion and a
second we don't have any other
director comments. You took your
hand down. So let's go to public
comment please. For anyone in
the room on this item.
Hey, good afternoon. My name is
simon viloria, organizer and
co-chair for the traffic safety
task force. First off, thank you
again to jennifer and mta staff
for the engagement and continued
communication with our community
. Um, I've already mentioned in
last meeting, but again, want to
reiterate the need for this
project to be done
simultaneously as the rest of
hyde street. I know it's also
frustrating that added
complications to this project
with one chunk having a separate
hearing as well as an additional
issue on pedestrian safety with
the market moving, I understand
that this wasn't anticipated and
I think staff might share the
same frustration. So I just want
to put that on record. Also, we
need a solid commitment of
painting the transit only lane
red and evaluate before and
after colorizing as colorized
transit lanes is a greater
visual indicator of road diet.
And with the problems in the
lack of enforcement, it MAY also
act as a deterrent. And then
finally, we ask that we continue
to be transparent and to
continue clear communications
with the community of the
evaluation results and if any
changes will be made. And this
will help continue to build
trust, exemplify this culture of
care and put equity policies
into action. So again, thank you
for your time. Thank you to mta
and looking forward to getting
this project completed. Thank
you. Next speaker, please. Hi,
stacy randecker for the
tenderloin. I believe has the
lowest percentage of car
ownership of any neighborhood in
san francisco and they suffer
disproportionately because their
neighborhood is designed as
essentially a highway
interchange. You have these
massive three and five,
including parking long one way
streets going in in in opposite
directions. The sister street
whole concept it's great for
throughput, but it's terrible
for people. I didn't see a bike
lane in there. If polk were
pedestrianized, I'd get it. I'd
understand, but polk is a show.
Okay. It is very difficult to
bike on. It is not safe and it
is the only north south corridor
for in in the whole that whole
quadrant of the city. I mean.
Yeah. Oh yeah. You gave a little
bit on battery but what are you
supposed to do. I mean it's like
this is not equitable. Public
transit includes vanpools is an
economically and environmentally
sound alternative to
transportation by individual
automobiles within san
francisco, travel by public
transit, by bicycle and on foot
must be an attractive
alternative to travel by private
automobile. This is in your
transit first principles. It
goes on all the documents that
are printed. Every project has
this and more are emblazoned
upon it. Why aren't we adhering
to it? Why are we talking about
keeping parking? Why aren't we
read ing and greening this
entire city or closing it to
automobiles so that you don't
have to do any of those things
where are we going to do that?
Please is thank you. Any other
speakers in the room? Okay.
Please open the phone. Actually,
I want to speak on the project.
Jay is not quite yet. This is
the hyde street. That's item 13.
Thank you. Remote public comment
at this time. We will move to
remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator for speaker.
Hi this is dylan faber community
and policy manager at san
francisco transit riders. We
support the hyde street quick
build project and thank staff
for the extensive outreach
that's been done to transit
riders and the tenderloin
community. But we would at the
same time like to see the
addition of red paint, the
inclusion of transit only lanes
and a road diet on hyde street
from eddy to mcallister will
improve safety and reduce
conflicts on the corridor, all
while improving speed and
reliability for the thousands of
riders who rely on the 19
transit. Only lanes are a common
sense solution to improving
transit service in our transit
first city. But we're concerned
that the proposed designs
presented today do not include
the red paint. It's standard for
24/7 transit only lanes in san
francisco to receive red paint
to make it clear to drivers that
they should keep the lane clear
for transit vehicles. We know
red lanes work sfmta studies
have found that painting transit
lanes red can increase
compliance from drivers by up to
55, even if overall overall car
traffic on the road increases.
So we support the swift
implementation of this project
with transit only lanes added
immediately as soon as possible,
with or without red paint, but
red paint should be added as
soon as staff capacity and
resources allow. So before
approving this item, the board
should direct staff to update
the proposed designs to ensure
that red paint is included as
part of the transit lanes. Final
implementation. Thank you. Thank
you. Next speaker. Hello
directors. My name is eric
roselle and I'm a long term
resident of the tenderloin and
the director of state programs
at timberland community benefit
district and chair of the
tenderloin traffic safety task
force. First, I want to thank
the sfmta staff in particular
jennifer and kimberly, and their
hard effort in addressing our
some of our questions and then
some of our concerns throughout
this entire process. As jaime
had stated earlier, we really do
ask that the fast track, the
quick build project in its
entirety from geary to market
street. Second, we ask that the
complete implement station of
the transit only lane from eddy
to market happen in tandem with
the high street transit lane
project. And that number three,
that the paint of the traffic
only lane is red painted red
from eddy to market street. That
was indicated in the first
outreach extensive outreach that
was done that was shown that it
would be red. It wasn't until
later that it was indicated that
they would not be red and there
was not extensive outreach when
that plan had been changed to
inform the community in detail
that that plan had been changed.
Um, and so we feel like there's
been kind of a bit of switch
bait and switch going on there
anyway. We also want to ensure
that transparency again does
happen with the evaluation
process. Thank you for your
time. Thank you. Next speaker.
Can you hear me now? Yes, go
ahead. Great. David pilpel,
again. So on this item, I am
opposed to this proposal. Hyde
street feeds eighth, which is a
major freeway access route in my
opinion, there is not that much
transit service on this segment.
The 21 hayes the 27. Bryant and
golden gate transit can all be
rerouted off of hyde. So that
would only leave the 19 polk,
which doesn't run that
frequently. Somehow I thought
that capacity on hyde street was
either a condition or a
mitigation measure for the van
brt project or the polk street
project. It's one of the few
north south streets, in this
case, a southbound street that
was not impacted or was not
directly affected other than
having additional traffic from
the van ness and polk street
projects. And as I said, it
feeds eighth, which is a major
freeway access route. I think
that if this project is approved
, this will mean more congestion
and pollution on a corridor in a
neighborhood that doesn't need
it. It's not my idea. But in
fact, people drive people who
live in the city drive to the
peninsula to drive to the east
bay, need to get to a bridge and
a freeway. I don't see that the
benefit here outweighs the
costs. 30s I am opposed to this
item. Thanks for listening.
Thank you. No additional callers
. Okay, close public comment. We
have a motion and a second.
Please call the roll on the
motion to approve director
hemminger. Hi hemminger.
Director henderson. Henderson. I
director hinsey. Hi, kinsey. I
director. So I. So I director
yukou I director kahina. I
kahina I chair egan I egan. I
thank you. The motion passes us.
Thank you, colleagues. I'd like
to given the late hour. I'd like
to recommend we take item 13
next, which is an action item
related to the j church project
and then reevaluate if we want
to continue item 12 to the next
meeting or keep going. Okay.
Very good. Thank you. Places you
on item number 13 amending
transportation code division
two, section 601 to designate
full time transit only areas on
san jose avenue between ocean
avenue and carter street, and
approving various parking and
traffic modifications include
the designation of a class four
bikeway at church and market
street, with staff available to
present.
Okay good afternoon, directors.
Good evening. Whatever it is now
, my name is michael rhodes. I'm
the transit priority manager in
the transit division and I'll be
presenting today about proposed
muni forward improvements on the
j church. The j church line, the
j church muni forward project is
a capital project that is split
into three segments. Today. I'll
be talking about proposed
upgrades at the intersection of
church and market streets and on
san jose avenue in the mission
terrace neighborhood. A future
phase of work will be looking at
muni forward improvements to the
j church in noe valley. The
project goals are to improve
safety, accessibility and
comfort at church stops to
address traffic safety concerns
and support reliability on the j
church, as well as supporting
small business and neighborhood
commercial vitality, especially
at the church and market
intersection at church and
market streets, thousands of
people get on or off the j or 22
every day. It's also a key
transfer point to church street,
muni metro station below ground.
And just as importantly, it's a
vital neighborhood commercial
hub. We've made a series of
quick build improvements since
2020 to enhance safety and
accessibility and the overall
transit passenger experience. At
this stop in short, we've
basically been gradually
upgrading this area from a basic
transit stop to more of a
transit and pedestrian plaza.
And we're working on more quick
build upgrades coming soon,
focused on enhancing the
transit, enhancing the actual
plaza space. As you MAY recall,
this board already approved
permanent transit plaza upgrades
in DECEMBER 2021 at this
intersection, detailed design on
the permanent plaza is underway
in collaboration with public
works and local merchants and we
expect construct on the
permanent plaza to begin in
2025. The reason we're talking
about this intersection today is
to give you an update on the
design and to seek approval for
a sidewalk level bikeway through
the permanent plaza. Here are
some of the elements that will
go into the permanent version of
the plaza. There are basically
two main zones in the plan
design. There's the transit
passenger zone. That's kind of
where people are waiting for the
train. That's kind of more to
the left of the diagram here.
And then a public plaza space
kind of an extension of the
sidewalk right next to sort of
verve coffee and in that area
there where people can drink
coffee or dine from local
restaurants and basically have
high quality neighborhood
gathering space. The plaza will
include a permanent, wheelchair
accessible platform, um,
comfortable and welcoming
transit, passenger amenities and
streetscape upgrades and seating
. Church street is not a
designated bike route, but it
does have a fair volume of
cyclists and we want to make
sure they're not riding in the
track lane. So we're proposing
to include a bike path between
the two zones. The original
approval for this plaza included
an exemption for bikes in terms
of the traffic restrictions, but
it didn't designate it as a
class four bike route. So this
is sort of an administrative
clarification of what was
originally approved. So that's
an update on what we're working
on at church and market. And
again, the only action item for
the board for church and market
is going to be to potentially
adopt the proposed bikeway.
Shifting south. We've also been
working on improvements to san
jose avenue along the j church
in close partnership with local
neighbors and supervisors. Our
safire's office there are three
main challenge areas we're
looking to address with the
proposed improvements on san
jose. First is safety. This is a
high injury corridor and we've
had extensive you know, requests
for safety improvements from
neighborhood residents for many
years. It's been on the radar
for a long time. There
especially concerned with
speeding and safety when
crossing san jose and as well as
pedestrian safety at transit
stops. Second, of course,
transit reliability and finally,
accessibility. There's currently
a gap of almost two miles
between wheelchair accessible
stops on the j church in this
area. That's from basically glen
park down to balboa park. As I
alluded to, there's been really
a tremendous amount of community
advocacy around improving safety
for people walking in this
neighborhood. On san jose avenue
about a year ago, our project
team kicked off an initial round
of outreach to key community
members and community based
organizations in the
neighborhood who were already
kind of organized and interested
in safety improvements and
knocking, knocking on our doors
to have us come talk to them.
Over the past year, we've
presented about potential
improvements to the local
neighborhood association, to
community based organizations,
missions, to neighborhood
leaders and merchants along the
corridor. And this AUGUST, we
returned to the community to
share a final revised proposal
that incorporates a lot of the
feedback that we've heard
throughout this outreach process
. Throughout the outreach, we've
heard very strong support for
safety improvements and
improving transit reliability.
We've heard a lot of requests to
enhance the crossing experience,
especially for pedestrians,
particularly along balboa park
and some more localized feedback
around parking and loading
needs, especially at the roxy
food center at san juan avenue.
So here's what we're
specifically proposing on san
jose avenue between to 80 and
ocean avenue. First, it would be
transit lanes, which would
really primarily be there to
reduce speeding while supporting
transit reliability. This is
really about creating a road
diet on an overbuilt roadway to
reduce speeding while keeping
transit moving. So this would
reduce the roadway from four
general purpose lanes, so two
lanes in each direction to two
total through lanes. So one lane
in each direction, vehicle is
making a left turn and taxis
would still be allowed to use
the left lane or the track lane
where the trains are. There
would also be extended boarding
islands to provide safe loading
for all train doors. Currently,
some of the islands are too
short and people are stepping
off into a traffic lane.
Wheelchair accessible transit
stops would be added at two
intersections, so four total
transit stops would have
wheelchair ramps added that
don't currently have them to
improve accessibility and
flashing beacons, sidewalk
corner bulb outs, daylighting
and left turn, traffic calming
and continental crosswalk
striping to improve safety for
people walking as well. In
total, this project would remove
a net one parking space. As I
mentioned earlier, one of the
key pieces of feedback we've
received has been about crossing
san jose avenue along balboa
park. So this is an important
gathering space for the
neighborhood. It's a major a
major destination park as well.
Currently there are four
intersections along the park
where people MAY cross. As you
can see in this map, labeled
one, two, three, four, where
currently focused on upgrading
the three intersections that
have existing marked crosswalks
to make these really good
crossing options at havelock,
santa ynez and ocean. So those
are three location that are not
only intersections, but they
have a marked existing
crosswalk. But we've also
received a good amount of
requests to add a marked
crosswalk crossing. San jose at
sergeant john young lane, which
is a small park street midway
through the park. These requests
came a little later in the
outreach process and we've just
completed the engineering
analysis in the past few days.
So in the interest of
transparency and timeliness, we
wanted to share an update today.
Instead of waiting to get these
results out to the community a
later date. For now, we're
recommending that the focus does
remain on upgrading existing
marked crossings to the park.
We're not currently recommending
adding a marked crosswalk at
sergeant john young lane based
on a few key considerations.
First, there's been no recorded
injury collisions at this
intersection crossing san jose
in the past five years. The
pedestrian volumes based on the
counts we've done are pretty
low. This isn't a through
street, so for most people santa
ynez or ocean would be the most
direct path of travel. The
closest marked crosswalk is at
most about 370ft away at santa
ynez, where there's a stop sign
and marked crosswalk and a j
church stop and finally adding a
crosswalk here would require
significant investment, such as
curb ramps and flashing beacons
or a traffic signal to really
make it work well, because if we
just put a crosswalk there
without ramps and without some
higher visibility measures, it's
not going to be a successful
crosswalk. Unfortunately, we do
have limited resources and
improvements are urgently needed
at a lot of other high injury
locations throughout the city.
So that's why wayne, this
current safety record versus the
cost of adding a crosswalk here
with signalization or with a
flashing beacon and with the
curb ramps, we're recommending
that we do not add a marked
crosswalk at this time. But but
we do understand the interest in
this crossing and will continue
to monitor it and can revisit
our recommendation if conditions
change on the street. So in
summary, here's what we're
asking for. The board to vote on
today along with the san jose
avenue corridor, we're proposing
transit lanes that allow busses
and taxis or that also allow
left turns from ocean to carter
street. A left turn must turn
left northbound at ocean avenue
on san jose to facilitate the
transit lane. It attended
boarding islands and new
accesses stops at santa ynez and
santa rosa intersect ocean
daylighting at san juan
paulding, santa ynez and biden
and baden rather. And flashing
beacons at san juan and pauline
avenues. These flashing beacons,
if you're not familiar with
them, are those pushbutton signs
that you push and it lights up
and says there's a pedestrian
crossing the street as well as
pedestrian bulbs or sidewalk
corner extensions at paulding
and baden streets at church and
market directors due to the fact
that the required language for
the class four bikeway was not
included on the agenda for today
. We are recommending that you
approve the entire item today
except kept the bikeway, which
is item h, and we will bring the
bikeway back for your approval
on NOVEMBER seventh. On your
consent calendar, we will. We've
given you the background
information on it, but we would
bring it back for approval in
two weeks on the consent. And
here are our proposed and next
steps. OCTOBER 17th. That's
today. The sfmta board is
reviewing our proposals for san
jose avenue, the class four
bikeway at church and market
would be postponed for two
weeks. As I mentioned, you're
going to receive an overall
update about muni service today,
but just to clarify, there are
no proposed changes to the
church as part of this project
or in general at the moment.
Later this year or early next
year, we will implement the
quick build phase of the project
on san jose avenue. If approved
and planning and outreach, we
hope to also start for the noe
valley segment. The final
segment of the j church muni
forward project in that time
frame over the next two years,
we would complete detailed
design of transit plaza
improvements and the san jose
avenue permanent version of the
improvements and starting in
2025, we would start
construction of full capital
elements at church and market,
san jose. The whole project,
including boarding islands,
flashing beacons, accessible
stops, bulbs, all of the
elements that we can't complete
during quick build. So so thank
you very much. Directors of
course, our team is available to
answer any questions you MAY
have about the proposals. Thank
you, colleagues. In light of the
late hour, I'm going to go to
public comment ahead of your
questions. That's okay. Any
commenters in the room for the j
church item? I do have some
speaker cards. Prudence hall.
Hillary bao. David hooper.
Samuel thomas. Go ahead. I'm
hillary brown. So start comedy.
Yes, actually, my name is
hillary brown. I'm with the mta.
Sam m sfmta museum and
accessibility committee. I've
been serving on this committee
for like five years. I would
like to eventually invite to
speaker, do a presentation to
the to the mac community because
we want to learn about how this
project is pertaining to
accessibility throughout the
citizens in san francisco. I'm
wondering, I've been serving it
for five years and I want to
hear about how they talk about
accessibility. For example, not
just wheelchair, but people who
are blind. That should be taken
consideration. I wasn't speaking
that because I also wish there
was a committee I think there's
a committee for the geary line,
of which there were a visory
committee for this project. And
if there is, I would like to
serve on it. I just all I want
to say thank you for your
comment. Next speaker, please.
Microphone is tall. My name is
prudence hall. I'm a resident of
the mission terrace and I have
been meeting with sfmta for a
number of years on this on this.
Thank you. I am personally in
favor of everything that I see
on this list. I mean, some of
the items I like more than
others, but you know, hey,
anything is great and we would
like them all. And I'm very
disappointed. Covid that
sergeant young lane was not
included in this list, although
I want to really appreciate it
that it's on the map now,
because when we first met with
philippe and with aaron mcmullen
, it wasn't even on the map. But
we have followed their
suggestions at the several
meetings we've had with them and
with michael jacobson of the
traffic calming program. We've
pulled in our community
partners. Carol jankowski, who
is the area five manager for rec
and park, and also now captain
amy hurwitz, the captain of
ingleside police station, and
she's appointed a person, sam
berenson, who works with us on
this. And we've asked for a
crosswalk at that spot. But I do
want to point out that it's not
just a random road. It is the
access to ingleside police
station. It is the access to
boxer stadium, a commercial
stadium, and it is flanked by by
a children's playground. And the
baseball fields. And we really
need traffic calming at this t
intersection as all
intersections in this section
are t intersections, not
squares. Thank you for your
time. Thank you for your
comment. Next speaker, please.
Hello board members. My name is
samuel thomas. I'm a mission
terrace resident at and I live
on san jose avenue. I'm a part
of the movement for a safer san
jose. I have a 17 month old son
who uses balboa playground and
crosses the street, literally
every day. So this is a big
concern for me and for other
families in our community who
are in the same boat that my
entire family uses the corridor
and we use it regularly myself
and the community supporting
safer, san jose are very excited
that this project is moving
ahead. We appreciate all the mta
staff's hard work in making this
happen and in making this
project a reality. We're glad
the board is listening and
taking action. These are all
great things. Overall, we've
heard from the majority of the
community that we've spoken with
that they're pleased with the
proposal, even if it doesn't
contain everything that we would
like to see, we would like for
the board to approve this item
today and for the mta to move
immediately with the quick build
portions of the project so that
we can see the situation
improved as quickly as possible.
With that said, one remaining
issue that has not been
addressed in addition to the
crosswalk is the elimination of
left turns from paulding onto
san jose. This is a big problem
in the current configuration
vehicles turn into a crosswalk
across four lanes of traffic and
that includes transit vehicles,
cars and this is extremely
dangerous and puts pedestrians
in harm's way. We know it's
dangerous because our 80 year
old neighbor who one of our
directors has met was struck and
injured in exactly this way a
little over a year ago. And he
now requires a home health aide
with him most of the time. So
with that said, I think we view
this project as just the
beginning, and there's still a
lot more to do. We need a
comprehensive set of streetscape
improvements every thing in this
proposal is fantastic work. It
is a transit optimization
project. We would love to have
the signals team as well as the
streets team engage with us to
move things ahead. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Stacy
randecker. Both these projects
hit me hard because my son,
well, both my kids went to
everett middle school and
because the 55 doesn't go all
the way to across to church and
market, we will often drive him
to church and market to catch
muni to go to lowell and my
daughter started her high school
career at balboa. My son played
ball on that field many, many
times and I am very familiar
with the street they're talking
about. And that is a desire line
that is how people go to the
park. And that should have at
minimum, the lousy freaking
crosswalk that you have there
right now. Just stripe it. Just
make it something, make it bold,
make it pretty big. I don't
know. But make it so that
drivers can see it. If you can't
do all of the other capital
improvements, at least apply
some stinking paint. So these
people feel better and in terms
of like how can you make it,
they don't read signs, they read
the roads. So you can have all
the signals you want, but you've
got to think about dieting it.
You've got to think about taking
away some of that, that parking
have the park, the rec and park
get involved. How about having
tree plantings that go out that,
you know, we don't have enough
street trees in our city. We
must have I know we've allocated
budget for that. Can we get
street trees that come out and
make these roads more narrow
that take some of these parking
spaces that make it safer for
people so it doesn't have to
come out of sfmta's budget, but
we've got to start getting
crafty about how we make these
streets safer for people all.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker, please.
My name is david hooper. I've
lived in mission terrace since
86. I want to throw a little
cold water on this project since
the line was extended in 1990,
there were no tracks on that
portion of our neighborhood. The
line itself, my I. I did 33
years with muni. My last 12
years were at central controls,
the train controller and a
manager. The line through our
community does not suffer for
schedule. That's the first. The
second is that it's only 12
years ago that we got the
crosswalk with a stop sign at
santa ynez to be able to cross
to the park. We've been beating
the drum about pedestrian safety
, you know, why did the
pedestrian cross the road and
we've been trying to work with
this so some things are great.
Improved islands, the bump outs
at the various intersections,
the effort to square off for the
motorists at paulding and at
baden, that hazard, the yellow
hazard lights that's like are
they going to work? That has to
be seen. It's a very wide street
. I saw the lights are on either
side. But the big item for me is
that painting the town red
painting, the transit lines. Red
is it's nonsensical and the line
doesn't need it for transit at
the street on either side. We
have nothing but left turns. We
go, it's a t, you have to make a
left turn to go into the park,
to go to the police station, to
go to boxer stadium, you have to
make a left turn at paulding or
at baden going northbound
because you are going on to a
freeway overpass coming
southbound. It's the same thing.
We don't have any of the squared
off intersections. The cars will
still be in the red lane, the
left lane. And it's monkey see,
monkey do once others do it,
people will do it. I don't see
the value. Thank you. Thank you.
Any other speakers in the room,
please open the phones at this
time we'll move to remote public
comment. Not to exceed a total
time of ten minutes. Members of
the public wishing to comment
should dial star three to enter
the queue. Each speaker will
have two minutes. Moderator
first speaker to. Great. Can you
hear me now? Yes, go ahead.
Great. David pilpel again. So on
this item, while there is some
more discussion of stakeholder
engagement in the staff report,
it just raised some additional
questions for me. If the
community asks for various
things, it didn't really commit
more than just, oh, we're going
to, you know, maybe look into it
. So I'm I'm just concerned
about the lack of meaningful
discussion about stakeholder
engagement in staff reports. It
is not particularly clear to me
why these changes are being
pursued right now, given what
staff said earlier about about
staff availability and other
things. This just doesn't seem
like the highest priority to me.
I did hear david hooper speak a
few minutes ago and I heard him
speak at the friday hearing on
this that essentially that this
project by itself will not
improve j church reliability.
And I agree with him. I think
that is true. And he has a lot
of experience since as a transit
supervisor for central control
dispatcher, train controller
manager for it seems to me that
there really are far more
important priorities right now.
So I'm not sure that I would
approve this particular action
today as it is, staff already
said that part of this will be
back at your next meeting. And I
agree with the speaker a few
ahead of me that said that this
really needs a comprehensive
plan and this just seems like
bits and pieces on the san jose
avenue portion. 30s and it's a
thanks and it's a follow up
piece that church and market
that's somewhat inconsistent
with other things that could be
happening there. Bottom line is
I'm not sure I would do this the
way this is currently packaged.
And I think the better solution
is to harness. Stacy ran
decker's energy as a power
source to supply power to muni
and to all of us, because I was
very impressed with her passion
on this and other items. That's
all. Thanks for listening. Thank
you. No additional speakers.
I'll close public comment.
Colleagues, I think we had a
couple of questions or comments
earlier. Director kahina did you
want to? Yeah speak. Of course.
Well, thank you to staff and to
all the community advocates that
really brought this issue to the
board. I think it was last year
where where folks were really
pounding the drums to make sure
that we paid close attention to
san jose avenue and to really
focus on traffic calming in that
in that corridor, particularly
after MR. Martin's collision.
And I did have an opportunity to
meet him and it was really
challenging to see how he was
just still navigating the
streets, still bravely crossing
the street, even though he
almost perished after that
collision. And it wasn't a
fatality, but it was a hair away
from being a fatality. So I just
really want to thank the
community for rallying for him
and for his for his safety and
for so many of the folks are
elder community members in d11
because we do have the highest
percentage of seniors, highest
percentage of families in that
district. And so a corridor like
this that serves the park, that
serves schools, it's imperative
that that we are doing our
utmost to make sure it's safe
for pedestrians. And so I did
have a few clarifying questions
about the project itself. I did
see that. So the intersection
where MR. Martin was was hit was
on paulding and san jose. And so
I appreciate that we are looking
at some solutions there,
particularly the rapid flashing
beacons. And I do see that
within the I guess like the many
options of treatments there. We
also have left turn traffic
calming as one of the pieces
that we're considering
implementing throughout that
corridor. Why are we not
implementing it there? Thank you
. So the challenge at paulding,
unfortunately, is that there
isn't the street space basically
to add the additional space that
you'd need to put the left turn
traffic calming. It's basically
a, you know, it's posts in the
street or kind of a space in the
street that that folks people to
make a wider turn at at at a at
at baden there is space there is
extra lane space but at paulding
the lanes are really you know
basically as narrow as you can
make them without squeezing in.
There's not really room to
squeeze in that kind of traffic
calming. We can certainly, you
know, sharpen our pencils and
look back at it. It doesn't it's
not really a legislative change.
It's a project feature, but it's
not something that requires an
approval per se. But we can you
know, we can certainly take
another look and see if there's
anything else we can do to
further support that. Yeah, I
think that's it's critical,
especially like paulding and
baden specifically. There there
are ways that folks from the
monterey boulevard or that that
particular neighborhood connect
to san jose then get on the
freeway or cross into other
neighborhoods. And so it's a
they're both like feeder streets
to the freeway. And so it's I
think it's super important for
those streets in particular to
get the most amount of
treatments as possible because
folks are usually speeding to
get across those streets at the
other street that came to mind
and I appreciate all the public
comment on this too, because
it's I think it's merited.
Sergeant john v young lane so I
understand. And that you all did
a study, so I appreciate you
doing the study. But you know, I
know the street very well. A lot
of folks there's a there's a
parking area for folks that
frequent the park and it's cars
are often going there like
frequently just to find parking
to access the park, to go to the
police station to use the
diamond ring, like all these
different activations that are
that the park has. And this is
one of the few parking areas is
in that park. And so there are
always cars going through there
at various speeds, even though
there's a police station right
there. It's really interesting
and so curious why why we're not
proposing something there more
substantial to create a safer
passage for pedestrians. There
yeah. And to your point, that is
a busy well, you know, it has it
has activity. People accessing
the park and the one collision
that we do have in the past five
years at that intersection is
actually somebody walking along
san jose crossing sergeant john
young lane. So it's, you know,
in that crosswalk where they're
crossing, sergeant john young
versus crossing san jose and so
we will be upgrading that
crosswalk from a kind of
traditional kind of two lines
kind of crosswalk to a
continental crosswalk to improve
the visibility. We've also so
the that that intersection has
full daylighting at this point
to increase the visibility
there. But in terms of the
collision history, what we've
seen is really just that one
collision. That was somebody
crossing john v young and it
speaks to what you mentioned,
which is that there is activity
of people kind of driving in and
out of sergeant john young.
There are people crossing in.
John young, so certainly we want
to make sure that's as visible
as possible. So again, like I
think we really need to explore
for making crossing across san
jose, whether we're exploring it
or studying whatever it is. But
I do think we need some
intervention there and I feel
quite passionate about it
considering I think also the
members of the public also
talked about this too. So there
are tons of families that get
serviced by that intersection.
And I just I see it as as a MISS
If we're not really paying close
attention to how that that
particular intersection can be
safer. And I don't want to wait
for a collision to happen to
make the call. So I would
encourage staff to really
explore that thoroughly. If
we're true to our visions or
goals, the other piece, let's
see if I want to let me see. I
think those were the two main
pieces that I wanted to bring
forth to the board, and I know
there is quite a lot of energy
for folks to eliminate left
turns on paulding. But I can
understand why why that's
something that the I don't know
if you all want to explain that
a little bit more, why we opted
not to eliminate left turns.
There yeah, it mostly comes down
to the street grid in that
neighborhood. There's only a few
streets that actually cross to
80. It's not a regular street
grid where streets go through.
There's not a lot of full kind
of four leg intersections. So
when you restrict the left turn
there, it's not like the mission
or somewhere where you might
just make or downtown where you
might make three rights to be
able to access your destination.
It requires a lot more foresight
to know, oh, I guess I need to
turn left here and turn right
there and if you MISS Your
opportunity to do that, you're
kind of in a tricky spot and
there is a commercial corridor
immediately north of paulding
that we want to make sure people
can access and not make that too
difficult for the small
businesses that are there. So
those are the primary
considerations. We, you know, we
like restricting lefts in some
cases to preserve safety or
protect safety and keep transit
moving. But this is one location
where we think the circulation
was a little bit bigger
consideration. And just to state
my position on this, I fully
support this project. Of course,
I want more on that street. This
is a neighborhood that doesn't
really get its due, its
investments. And so I appreciate
the level of effort and care
that the team went through to
make sure that they were
connecting with all the members
of the public. And I understand
that not everyone got 100% what
they wanted, but this is close
enough for me to support this.
Thank you. Vice chair cajina
director. So and thank you for
the presentation. I like a lot
of the graphics and I'm trying
to make it brief because it's
like 6:00. I just to really two
questions. I love that balboa
park playground and also my
daughter's always go there now
practicing various different
kind of sports. So I'm just
curious of why you chose to have
a stop sign on santa ines
crosswalk. Whereas you know, on
the sergeant john vision, you
just have a no mark crosswalk.
Yes. Thank where? I'm sorry.
That's actually where exactly
all the parents would go with
their three year old toddler
that's like that would be the
one they will cross. Yeah.
Totally understand the question.
As a parent of a three year old
toddler, I totally get that. But
the main there's kind of a
couple main reasons, one of
which is that sergeant john v
young does not continue as a
street once it crosses san jose.
So the only kind of case where
sergeant john v young would be
your most direct path of travel
is if you were located
immediately be kind of to the
east of it's not a through
street, whereas santa ynez is a
through street that, you know,
kind of circulates into the
neighborhood. Santa ynez is also
the location of a j church stop.
So that's where people are
getting on and off the train.
And we want to make sure that's
safe, accessible place to have a
stop sign. So those are you
know, it's that circulation
element and it's the it's the
train stop. So is it too much to
ask for having that? Number
three, you have that blue dot
there to actually have some sort
of flashing on the marking on
the street? I just want to make
sure that we don't have another
our toddler got run over by a
car and killed. So. Absolutely.
So most of the time we will take
the shortest cut because kids,
we just want to get them to the
playground as quick as as
possible. And you know, I mean,
like, you know, that's that's
the you know, can we do that?
You know, I get that completely.
So the reason that we made the
recommendation is that if we are
going to mark this as a
crosswalk and say this is a
place you should cross this, you
know, right now what the street
tells you is you should cross at
santa ynez or at ocean because
those are marked crosswalks.
They have a signal or they have
a stop sign. They have the
infrastructure that sort of
invites you to cross. Right now,
if we were to add a crosswalk at
at at sergeant john v young,
we'd really want to add more
than just a crosswalk because as
we've seen at other places along
the corridor, once you have a
basic crosswalk, that's not
enough by itself, right? So we
would probably need to do a
flashing beacon. We definitely
need to do curb ramps which
don't exist currently. We might
need to do bulbs to really make
it work well or a signal, you
know, there's all these
additional infrastructure
pieces. So it isn't necessarily
a decision between nothing and a
little bit. It's sort of like,
do we make a significant
investment in this intersection,
which, you know, isn't a through
street, doesn't have high
pedestrian volumes right now,
right now, our recommendation is
to channel people to that, that
nearest intersection 350ft away.
But we understand that, you know
, if you're trying to get across
the street, there's the
playground, just get out of your
car. We get it. I totally get
it. That that's that's an
attractive place to cross. So I
would just weigh, you know, this
is a location with no injuries.
We have a lot of locations in
the city with high numbers of
injuries that could use that
same investment. It would
probably be, you know, $600,000
or so to make the kind of basic
curb ramps, flashing beacons and
striping that, you know, a lot
of other intersections have
competing needs. But that's
that's sort of a policy choice
to weigh. And that's why we made
our recommendation. But it's
not, you know, it's something to
consider. So because it was
going to cost a lot of money. So
how about you combine the two? I
move the bus stop or move that
number two point that you have.
I'm just trying to I'm just
trying to say that can we solve
of a lot of problems with one
resources that we have like move
the number two and three
together. I think if we were to
do that, there would still be
the desire to cross at the
existing streets and we'd still
have requests for crossings so
that would be my concern with
that. That is kind of
unfortunate. Yeah, it's really
unfortunate. My other question
is that you mentioned about that
bike path of travel on on the
other side of town. Now, bike
path of travel is going to have
to go through some review. It's
not even that it's simpler. We
just literally there's some
additional sql related language
that should go on the agenda
that's posted for the board of
directors and the item itself
was listed, but it should have
said some language about this
being an approval action under
sequa. Et cetera. So it's just a
noticing issue. It's not a
review or anything else. Do you
mind then explain to me where
does it start and where does it
end? Sure. I only see the little
highlight photo shop color block
on the map. Yes. So it would be
basically from, um, market
street, which is kind of the
north end of the transit stop.
And it would travel through the
transit stop shop and then it
would stop sort of mid-block
through the market to 15th
street block of church,
basically just getting people
through to the, the boarding
area, you know, because after
that, there's a second lane of
traffic that bikes can use. But
through this transit stop area,
there's just nowhere else for
bikes to go other than into the
track lane. So it's probably,
you know, 300, 400ft, halfway
through the lock. And it's it
doesn't continue into a bike
route. It's not really a street
that we're trying to channelize
bikes to, but we know that there
are you know, 60 to 100 bikes
per hour that use this route
because it's flat and there's
restaurants and there's places
to go. So we need to basically
we feel like we need to give
them somewhere safe to get
through that transit plaza.
There's no bump or anything.
It's just the grade level is the
same currently. We would propose
it to be at sidewalk level just
to kind of make the plaza feel
more like a continuous space.
There would be there would be
kind of truncated domes or, you
know, like things on the street.
So if your vision impaired or
have other, you know, just so
that because it's flush, we want
people to know where the bike
lane begins. But it would be at
the same level as the rest of
the plaza. So when the bike get
off of this path of travel, they
will they will need to have like
a little curb cut or something
to kind of make sure they're
safe to get off. Yes, there
would be a ramp at the beginning
and end of it. Okay that answers
my question because I was like,
well, this is doesn't look very
safe for cyclists. You would do
you would make sure that they
don't end up ran into these
little ram edges, right? Yes
they would have a ramp that
would meet our standards in
terms of the you know, how
quickly it goes up and down for
bikes. Okay. All right. Thank
you. I would really highly,
strongly encourage you to really
consider doing something more to
mark that crosswalk to the
balboa playground. If you can.
Thank you. Thank you, director.
So, director util, I will make
this very, very quick. It is
about the plaza. I believe we
talked about it almost four
years ago. Is that right?
DECEMBER 20, 21, three. Two
years ago. So I'm just a little
it says here that it will begin
construction in 2025, which is
over a year from now. And that
intersection is suffering a lot.
I pass by it every single week
and there are a lot of that side
of the street. There's been a
lot of closed businesses.
There's trash everywhere. It
looks very junior varsity right
now. And I'm a little worried
that we're saying it will be
another year and three months
before we even begin
construction. And I don't see an
actual timeline for completing
construction. So one, why can't
we start construction
construction sooner? And two,
how long do you think
construction will take? Right.
So the that it doesn't that the
treatment we have right there
right now is not abetting the
neighborhood like junior varsity
is a good sports metaphor for
the current situation out there.
Yeah, it's we've been kind of
iterating on it. We added some
some paint to kind of claim the
space and clarify where the
plaza is. But totally agree with
you. We don't want to wait till
20, 25 to make any kind of
improvements. The next step
would be another phase of quick
build that would be really
focused on supporting the
businesses. And we want to we're
working to partner with pwd and
the local castro business
district to activate that space
to get it, you know, to get
better parklets out there, to
get the kind of near term
activation we can. We think this
is stuff that we could do in a
matter of months versus waiting
till 2025. Does that look like
just like filling it out with
something that isn't like dirty
white paint, like concrete or
even like a some kind of
temporary structure? It could be
seating, landscaping, some kind
of programing. So you're saying
that you're you're planning on
doing that in the next few
months? That's what we're
working towards right now. We
you know, as as sort of came up
during an earlier discussion,
ideally mta sets the safe
traffic conditions and we
partner with a local
organization that can operate
some of the, you know, the
seating or the, you know, the
other elements that kind of make
it a great space from a
pedestrian plaza standpoint. But
we are reaching out right now to
take those steps and partner and
then completing the final, final
plaza with everything in the
permanent way you said begins in
2025. How long is that supposed
to take? When will it be done?
So the overall project, we
expect that to be a two year
construction time frame for the
whole j line corridor. But I
would expect that the plaza
would not take as long as the
overall project. It will
probably be one of the first
things that we work on, given
the you know, it might even
happen simultaneously with san
jose. So probably you know,
hopefully under a year. Okay.
Then my final thing is just as I
know we're working on a lot with
muni forward, just don't forget
this intersection because it's
been such a tough one for some
of these small businesses. We
just had another small business
open just like 2 or 3 months
ago, and it's such a like
delicate, delicate ecosystem
right now. And I really want to
protect it. Those business
owners who are trying to make it
and I do think our treatment
right now is hurting them
because it feels very abandoned.
And so thank you for trying to
come up with a short term and a
long term solution for it. Okay
do we have a motion to approve
the item? Motion to approve a
second. Second, please call the
roll. I do want to clarify that
you do as staff suggested, you
amend that resolution to
indicate that items a through g
striking item h for the class
four bikeway, which will come
back to you at a future meeting
and remove the associated
language from the first resolve
clause for the bikeway. Can I
presume that is the motion?
Okay, great. Thank you. All
right. On that motion and
amendment, director hemminger
hemminger, director henderson
henderson. Director hinsey
hinsey director. So I. So I.
Director yaguchi I director ina
I kahina. I chair. Ekin I ekin.
I thank you that motion passes.
Okay colleagues, we have one
more item. The media service
update we've considered pushing
it to the next meeting, but we
have a packed agenda for next
meeting and we now have to take
hays street again at the next
meeting. Thank you. Director
yekutiel. And what was that
about appreciating you at the
next meeting? I'm just kidding.
So I would like to go ahead if
it's okay with staff and go
ahead and take that presentation
now. So very good. Item 12
presentation and discussion
regarding fema update. Right
good afternoon. Slash evening.
So we'll keep this fast. So but
do have some great news to
share. So thank you for allowing
us the chance to address you
today. So sean kennedy I'm the
senior manager for the transit
planning group at the mta. My
staff has already handled most
of the difficult discussions
today. So I'll just get to talk
about good news. Basically, we
want to go over where we're at
with the service restoration and
talk through some really great
trends that we're seeing both in
ridership and customer feedback
and then talk about kind of next
steps and where we're going over
the next several years. So I
guess with that, oh, one other
thing before I get going. You
know, a really good transit
system has is great transit
priority and great service
planning put on top of each
other, complimentary hand in
hand. So I will be today I'm
focusing just on service, but
we'll be coming back at the
second meeting in NOVEMBER to
talk through a muni forward
update as well. So with that,
you know, with the support of
this amazing board, we've really
become national leaders and
looking at changing ridership
patterns and how to adjust and
adjust and change for that
growth. And over the next two
years, we're going to have the
opportunity to get even better
at those skills. So we are
really focusing on quality of
service. That's kind of our our
key metric these days. And what
we mean by that is a fast,
frequent, clean, clean, safe and
reliable service. We have been
focusing you see the five
bullets on the on the screen in
front of you. You know, we could
go into ad nauseum detail on a
number of topics and projects
that are addressing those
different bullets. I do want to
highlight three real quick just
to give you a taste of what kind
of stuff we're doing to address
this quality quality of service
idea. One is we've changed the
way we do our scheduling. So now
we are now scheduling based on
operator hiring or the pace of
operator hiring. If you MAY
remember pre-covid, we were
delivering in 92, 93% of our
scheduled service. That means we
were missing about 5 or 600
trips a day, really, really
impacting how customers viewed
our service. You know, really
breaking that kind of bond of
trust that we were getting with
riders. So we have really
refocused. We've pulled back. We
now have about 82% or so of our
service, pre-covid schedule out
on the streets. So we've really
reduced the amount of service
we're putting out on the street,
but we are now delivering 99 to
100% of service. So really
trying to reacquaint that bond
with people that when we say
there's going to be a bus there,
there's actually a bus there
showing up on time. We are also,
of course, continuing our muni
forward work. Michael just did a
great job on the on the j church
couple last month, this board
approved the geary project,
which gave us the last ten
blocks of transit lanes on
geary. So now the entire
corridor has a has a transit
lane and protecting that
service. We also this board also
recently approved the 29 sunset
project, which we think will
save about 15% travel time for
that route over the next few
months. Once we get the quick
build in place. So really
exciting stuff getting getting
better use out of our existing
resources. His and the last
project I wanted to highlight is
our msw staff who you know I
think julie's talked about this
before but the great work
they're doing on the it week to
even come up with that idea and
then put it in place once a
quarter in case you you don't
know that project once a quarter
we shut down the subway a little
bit early for a week we go in
and do state of good repair work
so that it doesn't become an
emergency and doesn't become
that huge long delay that the
subway subway was seeing
pre-covid. And that's why this
graph here is so important to
us. We're really proud of it. We
reduced long subway delays by
70. When you look at pre covid
service. And one of the big
reasons for that really is that
fixit week program. So the
customers are noticing, which I
think is a super exciting part
of this. You know, often we do
projects and it kind of goes
unnoticed, but our approval
rating is up 10% from 2021. We
have of, you know, a lot of
tweets and a lot of anecdotal
things that are saying that
people are really appreciating
what we're doing. And I do want
to point out that it's not just
the structural changes we're
making on the muni forward side
and the service side on, you
know, on how we do our
maintenance work, our frontline
staff are contributing a ton to
this, this idea of quality. Our
maintenance staff, you know, our
car cleaners, our operators are
really embracing this idea of,
of, of leading with quality and
leading with kind of the
customer and customer service as
our north star, as we keep
delivering this service. So
that's really exciting. And, you
know, our ridership is backing
that up, backing up some of the
good things we're hearing. I
want to I want to highlight I
can't say it enough and I'm
really excited about it. I know
jeff and julie are two, but
SEPTEMBER was our highest
ridership month in four years.
You know, four years. It's super
great going in the in a really
great direction. If you look at
our average ridership in
SEPTEMBER and average day versus
our average ridership in AUGUST
on an average day we have about
20,000 more people taking muni
in SEPTEMBER than they did in
AUGUST. So going in the right
direction, really exciting to
see. And if you if you look at
just those general trends, those
are those are interesting. But
even more interesting is when we
kind of dig down into it and
look at some specific lessons
that we can learn from from
these trends. This this graph is
showing what our top ten
recovered lines are, meaning
looking at 2019, our pre-covid
ridership and the 2023, what we
saw in we were using actually
AUGUST for this this look, look
ahead. So what we saw in AUGUST
of 23 versus AUGUST of 19 and
what lines, as you have seen,
the biggest growth and you'll
see on there, you know, some
lines are at 100, 120, 130% of
what we were seeing in
pre-covid. An interesting thing
to note is that seven out of ten
of these lines are what we call
crosstown routes, meaning they
are connecting neighborhood to
neighborhood. It's not the
downtown centric you know,
straight into the financial
district during the peak period
type of ridership. And that is
just a really interesting
testament to how the riders are
using our system now, but also
explains how you know, kind of
we need to shift our thinking
and really kind of focus on
where ridership is going versus
where we traditionally have have
seen that ridership. Also, I do
want to point out all ten of
these lines have either a
capital project or or frequency
changes attached to them as we
try to address this additional
crowding that said, you know,
our budget outlook is becoming a
little bit more clear, and it
does look most likely that
during the next two year period,
we are not going to have an
increase in in funds for adding
service. And so what that means
for us in my group is that we
are going to have to be making
ng adjustments to crowding in
and trip, trip, trip serving in
a cost neutral manner. And that
sounds kind of kind of strange,
but basically what that means is
we're going to be moving
resources around and on the
margins, really, it's there's no
big huge moves that are going to
be made. It's trying to move.
You know, we've got some
crowding over here. Let's take
two busses from this line and
put it over there to try to
reduce some of the crowding per
bus there. So it's going to be a
lot of that kind of we're
calling cost neutral movement of
resources is, of course, our,
you know, our our highest
mandate is protecting the most
vulnerable of all of our users
is so because of that, we really
hope to really kind of continue
using the decision making
framework. We protect we really
made during covid. And that's
that's this slide here. I know
you guys have seen this several
times, but, you know, focusing
on equity strategy,
neighborhoods, using data, both
actual ridership data, but also
feedback from from our customers
on where service needs to go,
where we need to add more
service on the on the margins
and where we can take service
from to make sure that that
happens in order to kind of
formalize that framework. We're
starting a new program called
the biannual service evaluation,
which will be looking at system
needs a holistic look at system
needs across the entire system
and then prioritize leading into
every two year budget cycle
coming up. So this is not just a
data driven, data driven
process. Of course, it will
involve a lot of stakeholder
interactions and feedback. Most
importantly, we are starting a
muni equity working group that
will be directly involved in in
talking through these trade offs
and how we make some of these
decisions. So really excited to
get that work going and moving
forward as we as we look once
again at a cost neutral cost
neutral, forward looking stance.
So that said, I wanted to you
know, I think the theory behind
cost neutral is easy to
understand. And, you know, maybe
it it it kind of loses a little
bit in translation. So I wanted
to walk through with real, real
examples like what does that
mean on the street? How does how
does how do we make these
changes? What are the impacts s
and how do we reassess? So using
what we did in AUGUST, AUGUST
19th as the base of that
beginning, beginning example, I
want to talk through, you know,
it was the start of the school
year. We looked at data at the
end of the previous school year,
so the MAY JUNE data store where
crowding was happening in got
cers from school students and
others to understand like kind
of where the big problems were
going to be. When school started
back up in AUGUST, one of our
biggest and most crowded lines
was 19th avenue, specifically
the 28. So we knew we had to get
some more service on 19th avenue
when school started back up. But
we also knew we had to do that
relatively in essentially cost
neutral. So what we did was, is
we took the 28 local, reduced
that frequency. So instead of
coming every nine minutes, it
now comes every 12 minutes. And
with the busses we save from
that, we started up the 28
rapid. And so now at our rapid
stops on 19th avenue, we have
six minute service instead of
nine minute service and we're
able to do that really at a at a
cost neutral way. And you'll
notice also in AUGUST we did
some extra school service, some
extra school trippers, which we
paid for by basically reducing
the five frequency on the
weekends. So you know, that's
how we that's how we kind of
made some adjustments cost
neutrally, but, you know, since
then we've been doing a lot of
data work and coming up with our
next round of service changes.
And I want to bring up my acting
manager of service planning,
jessica garcia, who's going to
talk through the data that we
looked at and where we're going
in AUGUST. So jessica. Thank
you. Good afternoon. Or good
evening. Board of directors. As
sean mentioned, we wanted to
share some of the ridership
trends that we've been seeing
since making those changes in
AUGUST and also how they're
influencing our service changes
in the future here. So this
chart here compares current
ridership on some of our highest
ridership routes to last fall,
and we typically see an increase
in ridership when school starts.
But we wanted to see how that
compares to this time last year.
And so what we are seeing is
even with that traditional spike
, that spike is actually even
larger than it was last year on
these routes. And again,
mentioning the 28, it was
particularly interesting in the
data that we're seeing is even
with the introduction of the
rapid line in AUGUST, instead of
the rapid line absorbing
ridership from the 28 line, we
are seeing that the 28 line
ridership has been actually
pretty stable and the 28 the
rapid line is actually capturing
more riders. So overall, more
people are riding the service
and it's just another indicator
of our overall growth that we're
seeing. And with that ridership
increase, we also are seeing
increases in crowding. So this
chart here shows the percent of
trips that are over crowding
capacity in a given hour. And we
have a defined threshold for how
many people can fit on a vehicle
depending on its size. And in
this chart, we defined a crowded
trip as a trip where the
passenger load meets that
crowding threshold for at least
5% of the trips along that route
. So looking at this data, it
really helps us to see which
routes need more capacity and at
what time of the day. And a
trend that we have been seeing
is that the crowding is
happening at actually very
concentrated periods of the day.
So it's good news to see that
our ridership is increasing. But
the challenge is with our
resource constraints is how are
we going to address that? How
are we going to address that
demand in a cost neutral way?
And so this slide narrows down,
narrows down the previous chart
to concentrate on the routes
where we are seeing needing the
most help from here. We look at
the passenger loads at the stop
level and the direction and the
time of day to know how much
service we actually need to
reduce the crowding. So viewing
the data in this way is really
helping us target out, be more
targeted with our solutions. As,
for example, if the crowding on
the 44 line is highest from 7 to
8 A.M. In only one direction,
then we can then look for more
efficient solutions to address
the crowding, such as maybe
scheduling operators to do an
extra trip on the 44 line before
do they go to their regular
route instead of assigning an
extra vehicle on that bus for
the entire day? So we are also
looking at the inverse of this
data to knew, to know where to
pull from, um, so that we can
know how many resources we can
pull without pulling too much.
And so overall, this approach
has been driving our decision
options to reallocate resources
where they are needed most,
especially in this environment
where we're seeing the ridership
growing. But we're needing to
find a way to address it cost
neutrally. It's also dynamic. So
we are evaluating the
effectiveness with each service
change and our fine tuning as
needed. And so there are next
service changes planned for this
winter with an effective date of
JANUARY 20th. Using the data
that I just covered in those
previous slides, we identified
these routes as those needing
increased frequency to address
crowding during the school day
as well as on weekends. And for
these routes we are increasing
frequency another minute or two
on these routes with some of
them being all day changes or
just where the frequency is
needed based off of some of the
analysis that we've done to
remain cost neutral, though, we
are offsetting these increases
with decreases on other routes.
So we selected the routes though
based on the extra capacity we
saw in the ridership data and
are implementing the changes
that would not impact our
ability to deliver high quality
service. So the five rapid and
local and the nine local will
open up from a ten minute to a
12 minute. This will make the
combined frequency on these
corridors is six minutes from
the current five minutes and the
33 ashbury we are opening it
from a 15 to a 20. The 15 line.
We are not taking any resources
away, but we heard feedback that
the line was not meeting its
schedule. So we're keeping the
number of resources the same and
instead adjusting the headways
from 10 to 12 to make the
service more reliable. We are
also making a couple stop
changes to this route in
response to feedback that we
heard to add better connections
around the caltrain and ball
park area in the hunters point
area of this route. So in the
coming coming up with our
service changes, as as sean
mentioned earlier, we want to
take the opportunity again to
point out that we that looking
at ridership is only part of the
larger decision making
framework. Our overall approach
continues to be rooted in our
equity strategy. And to refresh
your memories on the background
of the equity strategy, it is
based on the muni equity policy
that was established in 2014 and
the strategy is updated every
two years with our budget cycle.
And the overall purpose is to
focus our investments in the
system centered around people
who need and depend on transit
the most. So as sean mentioned
earlier, we'll be rolling the
equity strategy framework into
that biannual service evaluation
project. And I'll hand it back
to him to cover what our next
steps are for that and others in
the coming coming months. Thank
you. Great. Thank you. Thank
you, jessica. So as we look to
the next budget cycle, we'll be
starting the biannual service
evaluation, working with our
muni equity, working group and
then, of course, continuing to
make cost neutral changes like
we like we just went over, I
think, you know, one thing I
want to point out and you know,
michael did a great job on the
j. You know, there are a number
of lines that are not going to
rise to the level of needing
additional service. You know,
based on crowding, based on
ridership. And the j is one of
those lines we are not planning
to add service per se to that
line right now, but we are still
doing capital projects like the
muni forward program to still
improve the quality of service
on that line, regardless of, you
know, actual service resources.
And we'll be able to, you know,
if we can save enough time, we
can roll those resources back
into the j itself. So just
wanted to point that out. And
with that, glad to take any
questions or comments. Thank you
so much. Director hemminger,
please. So sean, when are you
going to start picking on the
five? Fulton well, I mean, you
hit you hit us in AUGUST and now
you're going to hit us again.
What a memory you're going to
roll in the five r, which is the
best thing muniz ever done. Well
yeah. You know, that was like my
first project, by the way. I'm
really proud of that project. It
used to be called the, you know,
the, the five limited, but we
changed the name to rapid lo
those many years ago. But yeah,
you know, unfortunately or maybe
fortunately, I don't know how
you look at it but you know the
five corridor has more service
on it than, than than what it
needs. Now I know that that I
know that trip by trip or trip
by trip, that's not necessarily
true. But right. Well, and when
you're looking at the whole
system, you know, and trying to
weigh all those different
things, the five just has a lot
of service on there. What what
we're proposing right now is
it'll go to 12 and to 12. So the
long and the short will both be
12. So that still gives us six
in the inner portion of the
line. But you know, the point of
kind of going over those AUGUST
changes and now these next
JANUARY changes is to say. That,
you know, it's all iterative and
iterative and we'll just we're
going to keep looking at it. And
obviously, if we MISS The mark,
you know, and we and we pulled
too far back in the five, we'll
be finding a way to put some
more service back in there the
next time. So when you say cost
neutral. Yeah. I mean, how fine
grained do you get? Because I
assume some bus lines are more
expensive to run because they
attract more senior drivers. I
mean, am I wrong? Well, I mean,
well. So cost neutral meaning
the umbrella of our overall
operating budget will stay
basically the same. And how you
kind of plug and play in there.
You know, typically we use might
have played into the effect on
the five, right? No yeah. No.
Right. Right. No no. We don't
lay off our senior personnel and
then that's that's what I have
to conclude. Yeah. Yeah. Well so
and that's why all these service
changes are tied to sign ups.
Right. Because what happens is,
if we, if we say we're taking a
couple busses off the five and
senior operators wanted to drive
those, now they can't right now
their seniority allows them to
pick other runs where it makes a
lot of money so they can go to a
different line and make the same
amount or more money depending
on their seniority. So I'm
hoping that the five user to my
right will make some comments as
well. I can only speak for
myself. Yeah, tough decisions
for sure. I see you, director
henderson. I have a related
comment to that, if I if I MAY,
and this is just I remember when
we did the very significant
redesign of the transit system
during covid took away some
lines. You made recommendations
to bring back certain lines.
Some were left out, out. And
then sort of in response to
public feedback as I recall, we
sort of reluctantly brought back
some lines that maybe had not
been in staff's initial
strategic recommendation. And I
would think because it's been a
topic of conversation today,
like the 21 is one that
occurred, that it feels to me
like it's part of that category,
like it was not originally your
recommendation to bring it back.
And then we did in response to
public comment. So what I want
to know is what have we learned
from that? Because the case was
made effectively that it's a
lower frequency route, that the
five is performing much higher
service and ridership anyway. So
why bring that back? We did, as
supervisor preston said today,
it's running at very low
frequencies. My anecdotal
experience, it's not that
reliable all it's very empty. So
I want to know what we have
learned from those ones where we
maybe made the decision that we
had not originally recommended
as a nod to what we heard from
the community. And if in fact we
are affirmed in our initial
recommendation. And then why
aren't we seeing some of those
proposed for reduced service if
that was staff's original
recommendation, does that make
sense? I know there's a little
bit convoluted. Sean, do you
want to take that or do you want
me to? Sure. Well, I mean, I can
start and then and then maybe
you can add add any extra bit in
there. But you know, yeah. You
know, we have definitely learned
a, you know, we're always
learning. Hopefully knock on
wood and you know, the 21
provides us some connectivity
for some people that maybe had
mobility issues or something
getting up to the five or down
to the seven. But yeah, you
know, we have seen stronger
ridership on the five and the
seven than than the 21 is
providing. And you know, we're
just going to have to continue
to make those those changes. At
this point, we are not proposing
. I think what you're trying to
get at is, well, why don't we
just, you know, not run the 21
and instead that way we wouldn't
have to reduce service on the
five. You know, at this point,
like I said, we're pretty these
are pretty like minor changes.
And our budget, you know, it it
it looks pretty stable, at
least, you know, for right now
it could all change of course.
but I don't think we have to
make those kind of big, drastic
moves at this point. We're
making some subtle changes based
on crowding. But you know for
sure, if the budget system or
the budget outlook goes goes,
goes south, then, you know,
things are back on the table and
we're going to have to get more
drastic because, like I said,
we're we're doing cost neutral
cuts. If we have to actually
save money, it's a different
ball game and we're going to
have to be coming back to you
with with much harder decisions.
Thank you. And if I could add a
couple points to that as well.
So san francisco, though, is one
of the cities in the world with
the greatest extent of work from
home. That wiped out the
financial base, not only for
muni, but particularly for bart.
That was really, really
dependent upon downtown
commuters. Those folks are
slowly trickling in to downtown
san francisco and activity and
ridership is slowly coming back.
So one of the things that we
learned is adapting to changing
travel patterns is super
important. And no property in
the united states has adapted
more to changing travel patterns
than the team at muni. The
second thing that we learned is
that investing in making transit
, as sean said, fast, frequent,
reliable, clean, safe that drove
ridership up far more than
anything that we dreamt
possible. So here we're in the
city in the united states with
some of the greatest loss of
transit riders due the loss of
commuters. We also have some of
the transit lines with the
greatest rate of pre-covid
ridership recovery in the entire
country. What are we at? It's
over 130% on the 49 and close to
that on the 22 fillmore that we
had never dreamt like we were
hoping to get up to pre-covid,
we never dreamt that it was
possible to greatly exceed
pre-covid ridership on now ten
of our lines so that was an
extraordinary learning that
people would respond to so
quickly, even when overall
travel is down. If we deliver
quality of service and at the
same time, the third thing that
we learned a lot of it in the
very, very detailed work that we
did with community in the
tenderloin in japantown town and
other neighborhoods, is that for
some of our lower ridership and
lower frequency lines, some or
portions of those lines were
exceeding important to community
members and that align in 2 or 3
blocks away simply didn't
replace that function. So one of
the reasons why I think the two
sutter is a really interesting
case study where we brought the
line back but reconfigured it
and shortened it based upon what
we heard. And the two is
actually getting more riders
than I would have expected,
given that it is significantly
shorter. Similarly, the 27
bryant we rearranged in
interesting ways and have been
tracking that significantly.
It's never going to be crush
loaded like the 49 vns but but
it remains exceedingly important
for the riders that it serves.
And so that is our challenge.
And one of the reasons why we're
fighting so hard for additional
resources. Muni is this outlier
buyer success story in terms of
how we've made investments
during covid, but our underlying
financial goals are still weak
because we can't reroute our
train lines. Our train lines are
all pointed downtown. I can't
have them serve our
neighborhoods. And so we're
still struggling with our
financial base and seeking
additional gap funding as for
our ridership starts to increase
throughout the system and not
just on our our non downtown
lines. So core core learnings.
Director henderson, please. Yes,
I just have a couple of I think
I'm going to say some of my
questions to the future
presentation that you mentioned,
but I just have a quick question
about how will you measure the
crowding? So is it measured just
by taps or are you doing some
sort of visual survey or like
how does the. Yeah, great. No,
good question. Yeah our busses
and now trains are equipped with
with are equipped with what's
called apcs or automatic
passenger counters. So every
time somebody gets on or off a
bus, we know somebody's getting
on or off. We don't go by fare
revenue. We don't go. We by
visual inspection except on the
on the cable car system. So so,
so yeah, all of our busses now
have apcs and same with our rail
system. Got it. And then excuse
me. I'm sorry. Also the slide
that you had about with the
tweets or the x's. It just says
to me that there are some
thought about customer
satisfaction. And so I'm curious
to know not now, but I'm just
curious to know how are the ways
that you go about determining
customer satisfaction from, you
know, I'm sure through social
and other or other ways, you
know, there's you know, when
you're in the airport, right,
and they have the happy face or
the smile, the sad face in the
bathroom, you know, is there
like some version of that for.
Well, we do. Do we do a rider
survey? And that was the number
I was quoting. I quoted that we
were up 10% on favorability
since 2021. So we do do a rider
survey to gauge customer
satisfaction and what they feel.
Additionally, the city does also
. So same kind of thing. They
don't obviously don't do riders,
they do the general population.
But yeah, there's several
different methods that we gather
that information. The tweets I
note we carry a relatively
robust social media presence.
And so we have pios that monitor
tweets, get back to people that
are tweeting, and then we
capture some of the some of the
good ones. So we also have
what's called 301. So really,
it's a it's an information
system. I mean, usually it's
used for complaints, but
sometimes people say good stuff,
too. So you know, we have a
number of different ways that we
capture what people generally
think. Okay. Thank you,
director. So. So I really
appreciate that to share all
these data. And it's like a
really nice way. One thing about
is like transparency is very key
to bestow trust amount all the
stakeholders and I really
appreciate to show us like how
you dissect the data to really
identify why the overcrowding
and the busses that where we
need the resources. So really
applaud you on that especially
me addressing crowding for our
school kids time like the number
49, the number 29 and the 44
which each service not only high
school children but also
elementary school children. And
I really appreciate these effort
and the presentation on the
numbers on the charts is really
self explanatory. I love it. I
only wish that we can see when
the really friendly, smart lady
who show us the jessica. Yeah,
right. Thank you. Thank you,
jessica. When she said that she
used the same strategy to look
at the inverse version to
identify by which bus line that
we can utilize, because that MAY
be a little bit overly resourced
. So we can create a equilibrium
equilibrium and cost neutral
hopefully. Right. Kind of like
take some of the area. I wish I
can see those numbers to
identify that. Like how the san
bruno number nine and then the
bayview 15 is actually ended up
on the board of like increasing
wait time. So I would like to
see those similar transparency
on data. Mostly it will be
helping us and also helping our
communities to understand. And
wait a second, you know, because
we are talking about we are
looking at racial equity and
communities and but then now
we're like looking at the san
bruno and I and number nine and
also the bayview number 15,
where we haven't actually
increased the speed for the t
line. So actually after getting
off of not DR. Sorry director
henderson swearing in ceremony I
jump onto the t, but then the t
got stopped for no other,
whatever reason. So then I was
told by the operator to quickly
hop on the number 15 and that
that 15 is fun because it just
goes it zipped literally. Thank
you. It zips through so, so, so
I would love to see those
similar level of presentation.
So it just helps us and also
help the public to understand.
And maybe there's too many zips,
you know, I don't know. So and
also maybe if because the number
nine express had already taken
care of the majority of the
capacity of the passenger for,
then we can actually delegate
the number nine. But we should
it will help us to deliver that
story to the public better in a
comprehensive way. So then that
then we can really get out here
really happily. So that's that's
all I wanted to say. But I'm I'm
happy that we're adding more on
number 22 on the weekend. That's
my favorite line. And the
warriors season's coming and
also all the concerts. So I'm
looking forward to that. So
thank you. And number 44 is my
daughter's favorite line. So
that's I got to tell her, hey,
you don't have to wait for too
long now. So thank you,
director. So I want to use this
as an opportunity to do a
shameless plug of our data
portal. So all of the data that
sean showed today is available
on our muni data portal and is
updated every month. And that's
at. Sfmta.Com/muni data. It
shows the crowding, the
ridership recovery, total system
ridership. We try to be
completely transparent with the
public about how we make hard
choices with our limited
resources. Thank you. Thank you,
director. So and I just do want
to underscore, I'm a little bit
dismayed to see the 15
bayview-hunters point express on
that line for decreased
frequency as well. I consider
that a huge success story. We've
celebrated that line again and
again. That was a close
partnership with shamann
walton's office. I understand we
have to make tough choices. The
nature of my previous question
was if there were certain lines
that were marginal to bring back
at all before or and you had you
had tried to convince us that we
don't even need to bring back
those lines. I would rather see
some of those lines on this list
than what I consider to be some
of our workhorse routes, like
the five, five, 15 and the nine.
That's the nature of my
question. Yeah. So so that's
great. So just trying to explain
this a little bit more, the you
know, I was I was when we were
talking about the five, I said,
you know, it's good or bad,
depending on your point of view
because there's so much service
on the lines like the five line,
the 38, the nine, the 14 that
when we're looking for a few
busses, you know, you go to
those lines and not the lines
where a bus is coming every half
hour. Because if you take a bus
that comes every half hour now
you're talking about our
headways and that's, you know,
no basically no service. So, you
know, it really becomes that's
where the balancing act comes
in. And I would just say on the
15, just to reiterate what
jessica said, we are we're not
taking any actual busses off the
15. We're having problems
meeting the schedule with the 15
because the running time is not
correct. We had too few busses
to meet the running time. And so
the number of busses on the 15
is staying the exact same. But
we're we're changing the
frequency so that it can
actually come every 12 minutes
when we say we're going to be
there instead of coming. You
know, every 11 to 14 minutes. So
hopefully by providing a more
like reliable system, it'll
actually work better. Even
though on paper it looks like
we're reducing the frequency by
two minutes, hopefully that made
some kind of sense. But okay.
Okay. Yeah. Please julie
kirschbaum the only other thing
I would add is that time frame
for the changes that sean and
jessica are making is very
short, so we wouldn't without a
more extensive public process.
Reckon mend diverting the 21
hayes resources is eliminating
that route and then applying it
to school crowding in the kind
of 4 to 8 week period that
they've had to put together
these types of changes. We're
doing things that are more
incremental and less likely to
be noticed by customers. But if
it is the board's direct action
that we go back and look at some
of those harder choices that
would take more of a process,
yes, we can start to see how
that would fit into the overall
work plan. It's just not
something that would build trust
under the timeframe that we're
having to say, wow, AUGUST was
amazing. We thought we had
solved school crowding and in
fact we had put an itty bitty
band-aid on school crowding and
now need to go back in JANUARY
and make more robust changes. So
having the board feedback back
on those kind of tough trade
offs would would be very
helpful. And then we can take
that back and think through the
kind of timeline and the process
that would need to be allocated
in order to consider those
bigger type changes. DR.
Hemminger yeah, I won't be long
here, but sean, I think you
mentioned the fact that if we're
talking about saving money,
that's a totally different
ballgame. And I guess I'm
wondering when that game is
going to start and how prepared
you are for it, because it does
it seems to me that's where we
ought to focus a lot of our
attention. I mean, I was giving
you a hard time about the five,
but this the changes you're
making now are at the margins.
Yep, exactly. Yep. If you need
to save 20, that's not the
margins anymore. Nope. So do we
have a schedule for when that
whole bunch of trouble is going
to start? Yeah. So we've been
more successful than we were
expecting at improving
efficiency and generating
revenue. So that pushed the
soonest we would need to start
shrinking the agency into
calendar year 25 when exactly in
calendar year 25 is dependent.
You know, there's many the cliff
is the cliff. The cliff just got
pushed out a little bit. We are
of course, working very hard at
the metropolitan transportation
commission level and at the
state legislature to identify
additional gap funding to, you
know, the goal being to push the
cliff out beyond the NOVEMBER 26
election. And so in the
meantime, we are keeping a very,
very close eye on revenue and on
hiring, on thinking of hiring
again as a throttle. So we can
we can push the throttle forward
. And if revenue looks good and
we can hold the throttle steady,
which is what we're doing right
now. So we're neither shrinking
nor growing. We're continuing to
hire to replace those people
lost through attrition. And then
we can stop hiring in order to
shrink the agency. And my goal
from the very beginning of covid
was always making sure we have
enough runway to be able to
shrink the agency as needed
through attrition rather than
layoffs in order to meet a worst
case scenario, budget projection
. And we are maintaining that a
lot of time I'm going to open to
public comment for anyone in the
room on the transit item. Thank
you for this update. Hey, good
evening. I'll make this quick.
I'm organizer in tenderloin. I
do appreciate this presentation
on kind of curious about the
metro lines and how they're
doing. I also appreciate the
comment about incremental
changes versus anything drastic.
I'm definitely think we should
not think about redirecting
resources by getting rid of
services, at least not in the
meantime. Um, I think we should
consider the timing of those
decisions, especially if there
are any ballot measures that
we're going to be pushing for in
2024 for that, if we cut service
, that could affect how people
will vote for a transit line
that doesn't exist. So again,
just want to make sure those are
considered. I think I heard
director tomlin mentioning 2025.
So I think that that's a good
timing. But but definitely not
into cutting the 21 or any of
the services that are currently
running. So thank you for your
time. Okay. Thank you for
staying so late to provide
comment. Our next speaker. Hi
stacy randecker this is it was
great to hear this report and I
love the little incremental cost
cutting. It seems like that's
something that we should have
always been doing all along and
maybe we have been, but like
that's that's the kind of stuff
it should be. A well oiled
machine that is always being
fine tuned based on needs. My
daughter started at balboa, but
she graduated from lincoln and
she's one of those kids who got
passed up many times last year
and her trick was and many of
them, they would ride it
backwards to ride it forward so
that they actually could get on
the bus and so anything that can
be done in terms of working with
the schools and their release
times and the schedules and
whatever to make sure that our
kids get where they're going.
Would be great. I mean, my son
just got home hour and 11
minutes from lowell soccer. So
it's really tough to be sticking
with muni and not drive when
your kids have these, you know,
hang ups about about getting
where they they need to go and
then the other thing that really
hurts is hearing about any sort
of constricting or whatever or
funding and whatever. And I will
say once again, you've heard me
say it before, are ppe this city
there you should never be
parking for free in this city.
we could essentially be doubling
the budget of the entire agency
if we would put make every
person pay for parking and then
be charging a more market rate
for that. If you're worried
about any legal things, throw in
a free muni pass with it. Charge
$1,200 a year for parking in our
streets and you get a free
annual muni pass that I believe
would help solve things and is
we need the money. We should not
be cutting transit. We need to
be cutting down cars and I think
that would help. Thanks thank
you. Any other speakers in the
room? Seeing none. Please open
the phone at this time. We'll
move to remote public comment
not to exceed a total time of
ten minutes. Members of the
public wishing to comment should
dial star three to enter the
queue each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator first speaker
great david paypal so I continue
to converse regularly with sean
kennedy on more of the detail on
this topic. Our next scheduled
chat is this friday afternoon,
just as an example of some of
the ideas that I have that we're
talking about, I support
rerouting the 28 r to the golden
gate bridge with the 28 local
bypassing the bridge during the
day and to provide a connection
from the bridge to the presidio
ultimate to connect to the
marina. Some 29 sunset trips
could be extended back through
the presidio as is service used
to exist to improve those
connections. As and I think I
can do that in a cost neutral
way. Other proposals should be
considered, including some
combining of route segments on
the 18, the 23, the 54 and the
58, the 66, the 37, the 35 and
the 55. The 12 and the 27. And
the most obvious isthe easiest
thing is the 22, which should
have a long line, a short line
pattern. And there are others I
know and I think we all know
that we can have better service
where riders need it for the
same or less cost using
available staff and operator
availability. So I support cost
neutral resource reallocation on
that. John talked about. And to
that end, I plan to continue
working with sean and others at
mta on those efforts. I wanted
to conclude by saying once again
thank you to director yasujiro
and for the record, I have
nothing against the five fulton
I've ridden it before. I will be
on it again very shortly and
finally, despite the level of
division and strife in the world
today, I think this meeting,
although long was quite civil
and this is actually kind of a
model of how we can have
civilized debate and discussion.
So thanks for listening. Until
next time. Thank you. No
additional callers. That's a
great note to end on. Thank you,
david paypal. All right. If
there are no further comments,
we'll go ahead and adjourn this
meeting and I'd like to adjourn
the meeting in recognition of
the service of our dear
colleague, director, we are
going to MISS You very, very
much and we look forward to
acknowledging you more fully at
the next meeting. If you can
commit to being there. Yes yes,
we. Okay. Thank you, everybody.
Good night.